three two one here we go how are you sir
I'm doing good I'm super happy to have
you here if there's a Mount Rushmore of
video games your George Washington
you're up there so this is great people
have been kind of nudging us from years
and years to get this done so it's great
that we're finally able to make it
happen yeah I'm I have been from day one
a gigantic quake junkie and a doom
junkie so for me to have you in here is
a giant treat and everybody you know
I've talked about your video games and
your creation so many times on this
podcast so it's it's very cool to have
you here and thank you very much for
showing me before the podcast got
started I should tell everybody you
showed me the latest and greatest
version of oculus rift which is amazing
it's so small for people watching the
YouTube this is the entire unit this
this thing that sits on your head it's
very light and it's not attached to a
computer like you don't have to carry
anything around and there's no extra
everything is in here yeah so this is
the oculus quest the standalone device
and it's been kind of the culmination of
a bunch of different products that we've
been working on and it's the vision that
we had even six years ago just the idea
of not connected to anything you put
this magic hat on and you're transported
to these different worlds and this is
available right now anyone can buy this
right yeah okay so it's about the change
is actually pulled up the website push
this up to you how what is the battery
left on these things so depends on what
you're doing where I just sit there and
watch Netflix I you know it'll last a
little more than three hours if you play
some of the really hardcore games it
might only last two hours or so do you
have numbers on how many people are
watching Netflix on this thing so our
previous one right before this the
oculus go was a little bit more media
focused and that's one of our more
popular applications I mean surprisingly
things everybody thought that VR was
going to be all about these just amazing
gaming experiences but some of the most
popular experiences are doing reasonably
conventional things watching Netflix
watching YouTube Amazon Prime stuff like
that
where if you're like if you're you and
you've got a great home theater and
everything there's not this much benefit
to having a theater like that in VR but
if you're in a situation like you're in
a tiny room in Tokyo or something
the idea of being able to put on the VR
headset and have this like lovely ski
lodge atmosphere with a giant screen TV
it has some real benefits so in the end
VR should be a replacement for anything
you do on screens today whether it's
your phone your tablet your TV your
laptop your PC all of these should
eventually be superseded by just having
more flexible screens in VR and we have
lots of challenges now with resolution
and comfort for long term use but this
is the direction that everything's going
not only do you have things in VR that
you couldn't do anywhere else just
experiences that you can't have with
that level of immersion but it should
pull along every other thing that people
do with screens devices today that's I
didn't consider the television shows but
of course people would be watching
Netflix on this if it's possible have
you done the Disney World ride the
Avatar ride flights of passage now I
haven't done that yet it's amazing you
sit on this it's like a motorcycle
looking thing it straps you in place and
it's supposed to represent one of those
flying dragon things in Avatar and then
you have the headset you put that on and
the virtual reality experience is second
to none I mean it's incredible
super-high resolution and the motorcycle
is moving around you get wind and smells
and all these sensors yeah so that's one
of the really interesting things like I
think about that whenever I am at
amusement parks for things like the
Harry Potter rides and stuff like that
where they're doing lots with screens
and motion platforms where I think about
it from the VR perspective and anything
we're doing visually and audibly we
could go ahead and do a great job in the
headset so it's cutting it down to these
few physical things that you can't do so
you've got things with motion platforms
that actually jostle you around that you
can't do in VR you've got things like
smell and like the void I am where they
have the Star Wars experience there we
have a fantastic Star Wars experience on
quest which in many ways has a lot of
that magic but in the void where they
set it up and they blow hot air over
what's the virtual lava yeah
towards you that's something that you
still don't get but it's kind of like
the age-old battle of what can you do
differently in an arcade that you can't
do as good in your your home system and
VR now takes lets you do all of these
amazing things there but if you're
willing to spend millions of dollars and
build a theme park attraction
essentially you can still throw some of
these extra things and people joke about
when is smell-a-vision coming to VR and
there have actually been real companies
that have spun up to say it's like well
we want to do scent augmentation it's
not a great thing and those are still
the last vestiges of things where you
have to go someplace but the promise of
VR is to you know the world as you want
it not having to go to someplace to do
something magical and if you can get to
90 something percent of that experience
staying in your own room then that's
great what would they be able to do with
smellivision would you have like a
standalone unit that like has access to
the program so like if you were flying
over orange fields it would spray citrus
in the air so sort of like soaring over
the world have you ever done that
Disneyland rocket so somebody literally
did make this where they made a little
box that put that glue to attach to the
underside of the head-mounted display
and one of the interesting things about
sent as opposed to I like audio or video
with video everybody knows that you just
make red green and blue colors you can
mix them in any way and make all the
colors that we can see smell isn't like
that
I am our nose is actually a receptor for
a whole lot of discrete different
molecules there's no way to mix up smell
like the way we do with light to make
red green and blue primaries with that
so they really had to pick okay here's
the dozen or so smells that we're going
to have with this and it would just sort
of spritz it out on a little blast of
air I very close to your nose so it
doesn't need much of it to get in
hmm so if you really wanted to do some
sort of a jungle experience with you
know thousands of different smells of
plants and dirt and although you would
have to have like some enormous unit
that's spraying these various things
yeah although I suspect that at least
modern people in modern society do not
really have that discerning of a level
of scent like if you took I some
Peruvian indigent or something that they
probably would complain it's like oh the
fidelity on this is garbage I should
have 500 different smells here and I
only detect five right but you take you
know a normal City person and you just
three scents of jungle is probably going
to be
more than enough to sell the experience
yeah the guy in the jungle bill this is
sterile urine yes not real so what is
this Jamie so this is something she's
holding I know I get it she's pulled it
off it attaches to the head sorry
it says feel real yeah sensory mask so
it's a sensory mask that smell virtual
reality oh yeah and so it simulates
simulates hundreds of smells to immerse
you in the virtual world Wow
of course it's coming but why am i
shocked look at this guy's got like a
little cartridge just pop it in there
all the refilling your toner cartridge
on reliable scent generator how
hilarious but yes if you have to if you
have to rank your senses it's not in the
top two yeah it's probably gonna be
clunky like the earlier versions of VR
where you got that low resolution sort
of thing I remember my friend Duncan
he's he's a huge technology freak and he
had a really early version of the
consumer virtual reality headsets the
early early oculus and I remember
putting it on going oh my god even
though it's really pixelated like this
is a game-changer it that sense that
you've seen the future yeah you put it
on it's like it's not here yet but
that's the the ability to just project a
little bit past the flaws there and say
okay well we're gonna sort this out over
the next several years
we'll get higher resolution we'll get
the response better and you can imagine
what it's going to be yeah it's pretty
stunning and what you just showed me
today the the Star Wars one is actually
higher resolution than the void which is
the one that you pay to go see or you go
into the warehouse and everything I've
done that several times the void with
Star Wars and then the void with
wreck-it Ralph which is pretty cool too
it's really fun but the physicality of
having the actual props there the magic
of being in there it's like you pull out
your stormtrooper blaster and you helped
it around and that's really something
versus a lot of times when you're just
using the controllers to pretend you're
doing things you feel like you're a mime
some place some French mime kind of
pretending to do things and that doesn't
sell the experience and that's why I
have you know my favorites are the
things like beat Sabre we're in the game
you are swinging this lightsaber is sort
of thing
through things so your actions in
reality are exactly what your actions in
the virtual world are you swing through
it there's a little bit of a buzz as you
cross through it and it just feels like
you are you're projecting yourself there
now what about the possibility of a
haptic feedback vest or a suit or
something you could put on your body so
there's the interesting things all the
way back into the the doom and quake
days I remember one of the really early
I have kind of entrepreneur guys that
came by he had made this leather jacket
with all these impact pucks on it and it
had I had like eight or nine different
things that were these solenoids that
could deliver a pretty sharp thud and he
wanted to you know get eye support added
to the games for that the idea you play
that and what you're getting when you're
getting shot it actually feels like
you're getting hit in the back mmm and
you know I didn't think that was a very
likely I am mass-market consumer thing I
mean not too many people want that level
of fidelity where it actually starts
making you sore but that's one of the
wonderful things about being able to
open-source the various codes after the
games are a little bit older where
anybody that wants to can nowadays go
and take doom or quake or those earlier
titles and program in for whatever crazy
thing they don't have to convince
someone they don't have to go convince
skeptical John Carmack that this device
is going to be a worthwhile thing to add
support to the main line code they can
just go do it which is a wonderful thing
that is very cool that you guys do that
I think that's really cool and yeah this
is one of those things where early on as
you can imagine that was a tough sell in
the company where the people that
weren't coming from the sort of hacker
ethic background on the programming side
you get the business people and the
artists and the designers and they're
like we want to just give away our
source code won't that be a leg up to
the competitors why do you want to do
this and it was one of my I made me
really happy when many years later Kevin
cloud one of my early partners I told me
that yeah in retrospect that was really
the right thing to do and it's great
with doom and quake now especially doom
where anything that has a processor runs
doom if it's got a 32-bit processor and
it can conceivably display an image
people have ported doom to it and that
code will live forever a hundred years
from now people will be able to dig up
and run the doom source code and
emulator that is very cool now what was
the conversation like like when you guys
when you were saying hey this is good
for the community this is good for games
overall it's gonna get people excited
about it's just gonna generate more
business like what did you how did you
sell it so it's an interesting path
there where in our earliest games I can
remember that some of the very first
things that happened with Wolfenstein 3d
before doom where that was not set up to
be easy to be modified we were still
back in those days of fitting on floppy
disks so I had all the data compressed
in this non-standard thing that I just
made up at the time but people dug
through all of that disassembled the
code figured out how it worked and
started making some level editors and
doing the things like you know replacing
Hitler with Barney and all these early
mods and we're all like well this is
fantastic you know this is people taking
the game they played through the game
they loved it and they loved it so much
they want to keep doing things on it and
they wind up breaking into the game at
that time essentially to figure out how
to make new things so by the time we
were working on doom it was an explicit
top-line technical goal for me that okay
I had these graphics things I wanted to
do I want to do networking but I also
wanted to really make game modding a
first top-level feature so we added all
this ability to do though the wads and P
wads and we documented all of it and we
released a lot of the tools the early
source code so here's how you go ahead
and is much harder at that point with
the more sophisticated stuff going on
but here's how you build a level in Doom
and we even released the code for our
level editor although that didn't help
the community that much because we were
using these crazy expensive next
workstations and other people had to
take the steps to go ahead and make them
run on PCs but the step beyond that when
we were looking at quake I am so I knew
that I wanted to enable actual changes
of the gameplay because in doing me you
could swap out all the different models
you could swap out I the way things look
the way things sounded and some people
would go in and actually patch the
executable to do a few minor changes in
gameplay but the next step clearly was
allowing people to really make whole new
gameplay modes so that was how quake got
this quake C extension language and we
wrote a lot of the game in that and that
led to all the things like capture the
flag and
forretress and all those which was arena
yeah all these really really great
things but there were still things that
you couldn't do or couldn't do
effectively there and that's where there
was still this desire to be able to say
well what if we just gave them
everything what if we gave them the full
source code and let them sort of hack to
their heart's content port to other
platforms and again it wasn't a super
popular decision but the way I was
pitching it was well it still helps our
titles it still gives them life it gives
them life after they would have been off
the shelf falling off of people's radar
just falling into some game of nostalgia
but being able to let people make real
new versions of it would be you know it
would keep them current it would keep
them relevant and so the pitch that I
ran for years there was after our new
game came out with brand new technology
then we should be able to open source
release the previous generation so first
when doom was out we released
Wolfenstein when quake was out we
released doom and when the later quakes
were out we released the quake 1 code
and that worked out really remarkably
well I know at the time there were some
people in the company that are just like
this is just John's thing and they were
not really happy about it but I I was in
a position where I could kind of throw
my weight around a little bit that and I
was happy that I did it and in the end
everybody agrees it was a good win I'm a
little sad that more companies weren't
able to take that final step modding was
embraced broadly by a lot of game
companies but only a handful of
companies were able to really go the
entire way and release full source code
in your sense that's too bad because
that is one of the cooler aspects of the
quake community is that you know you
guys did release that stuff and there
were all those cool extras and things
you could download in maps so many
different maps that people had created
that were really interesting like I
remember one was a guy's apartment like
you could you could play quake in an
apartment like you could shoot you could
get to the top of the toilet and shoot
it things off the toilet it was really
amazing how did you feel about when
people would play the game competitively
and they would turn all the textures off
so I yeah that's that especially as a
sore point with the artists that have
labored for years to build these
glorious
and then you get the people that just
turn them down and there's two reasons
to turn them down you turn them down to
help performance in some cases in the
early days and especially the early
graphics cards you would get higher
framerate if you turned him down so
you'd have less latency in your response
times but there's also the even more de
faras thing about turning them all down
to improve the contrast on your enemy
acquisition yeah I
so people want this almost flat shaded
world so that any moving set of pixels
there just turn and fire at that and
that's I'm I never came to really great
terms with that where I always thought
on and the early days of eSports and
gaming we did always insist that people
have to play with at least plausible
resolutions there because we weren't our
game to look good we want people that
are looking at it for the first time
seeing these professionals play it I am
you know we don't want them to look at
that and say well this game looks like
garbage it's all flat shaded or blurry I
am luckily computers got fast enough
that people could start playing at the
frame rates that they wanted even with
the full textures running in it I am but
the whole pace of doing that I am kind
of the eSports and the competitive
gaming was very interesting we saw the
dawn of that with doom but it's been
pretty surprised it's been amazing the
state that it's taking it's gotten to
today where I remember when we did the
quake read anihilation tournament I gave
away my first Ferrari as grand prize and
I was thinking really this is just the
most over-the-top thing this is going to
be unmatched for years and it was only a
year later that there was some other
tournament with $100,000 prize coming
out so that went on went much quicker
than I expected and then today you have
just them the amazing celebrity of the
top pro players it's it's again it's
great to see the path that it's taken it
really is and it's very interesting to
see that they're now like legitimate
sports stars and they make a ton of
money whereas if you were a kid 10 15
years ago your parents would tell you're
wasting your time this is nonsense why
are you playing these games but now you
have a legitimate opportunity to be a
professional game player although I do I
get I ain't there's a hazard there where
what's this Jamie what are you pulling
off top earners this year compared to
the top Tiger Woods how much you want in
the Masters in the top Indy 500 earner
Tiger Woods 1/2 million in the masters
the top quake players one three million
one hundred and twenty one eight under
seventy two well it's not quake what
game is that dota
what is that what's dota it's a
different game than quake but it's very
popular right now
what's a stand for I've never even heard
of it it's a valve game I am you know
it's a it's a MOBA massively online
battle arena game directing all the
different little characters down there
and that along with especially League of
Legends even beyond that I not as
popular in the United States but is just
amazing overseas where they like if you
look at the numbers for things people
think oh the Super Bowl like the height
of all competitive sports whatever and
they a lot of these eSports games
especially in South Korea are they dwarf
those numbers really and these are just
variable yeah not aware of this where
you just get millions of people tuning
in an enormous arenas to write they play
and these gigantic places if you look at
this oh my God look at this arena that
looks like 30,000 people that looks like
a UFC event yeah yeah actually a lot
bigger than you let's the event is that
one should know about that one in
particular they have some really
enormous Vegas UFC event we ever had was
55,000 people yeah they've been well
over that that's crazy that's amazing
it's really cool to see and it's these
games particularly quake they are
unbelievably difficult to master and
it's one of the more fascinating aspects
of like video game play and addiction is
the complexity like when you would watch
like like remember do you member Thresh
oh yeah what first is the one that won
my Ferrari violation cool that guy was
the hero back in the day of early
QuickPlay he was just this what is it
Kenneth Fong is that his name or a
tennis ball Janice Fong Dennis Fung
there is there's thrush and I remember I
would watch demos one of the cool things
about quake was that you could is that
as far one of the furnaces that yeah so
that was I my old turbo 308 no you
return bow charged your Ferrari to which
I want to get to as well which is pretty
crazy but so this guy was like the first
real killer in Dennis Fung
first real killer in the the quake
playing games and you would be able to
watch him play on demos you play through
his eyes so you would be able to see
like how he does things and move around
it was really cool some of the
interesting things about quake where it
wasn't really so clear when we were
designing it but it is a brutal game
especially in one-on-one where a lot of
modern games are much more approachable
where if you followed a lot of the quake
games a lot of them were just blowouts
where you would get somebody that would
take control the level and they would be
running their pattern denying anyone any
foot in the door and you'd wind up with
these twenty to one blowout games where
yeah there are things that you can do in
game design to make it more approachable
where like if you don't have health
packs where you can keep because in a
game like quake you go in as long as you
come out on top in the fight you've got
this little window to run around and
bring yourself bring your health back up
so even if you're only 5% better
you might win every engagement because
you have enough time to go back get
yourself back up before you wind up rien
gauging we're in another game if you
didn't have health that that would
continuously you had the ability to
bring it back up then even if somebody
didn't win if they knocked you down a
whole lot then they might get you the
next time around and scores can be much
more even licensed quake gameplay winds
up brutal tending towards blow outs and
very frustrating before it did not have
the approach ability for new players
where a lot of more modern games things
like overwatch I can be jumped into a
lot more easily because team play is
another aspect of that where if you've
got a team you could be on the winning
team even if you suck because you might
have really great players that are kind
of covering for you there you can jump
in and have the chance to say hey I won
I am even if you didn't contribute at
all and you might wind up I am you know
doing something you start off being
completely useless and then you slowly
work your way up to being able to
contribute effectively for your team so
I can recognize some of these things now
about ways to make games more
approachable but the the kind of
brutality of quake like there was a it
was a taste that a lot of people really
did like it didn't wasn't so much
explicitly designed for that but it
worked out that way and that's one of
the interesting things as we look at
game design today versus the old days a
lot of
people fall into a sort of nostalgia
trap about saying well the games I grew
up with were the greatest games ever and
you see it with music and movies and
everything and I tend to be much more
optimistic about the state of things
today where the amount of effort that
goes into the modern games is
extraordinary just the detail and I all
the quality on all the different levels
but there is a little sense of games are
so expensive to make now sometimes in
the hundreds of millions of dollars that
they do have to be conservative so they
have to be careful to make sure that
they've got something that has a broad
mass appeal and I think that is the the
upside of some of the older games where
they might have a little bit more of a
distinct flavour they weren't sort of
focus group to death in the way than
some of the more modern games can be
that's interesting yeah focus group to
death I'm sure is a problem the the
quake blow outs although that is a thing
it's so fun when you're the person
blowing there's a person out that it's
worth learning the maps and that that's
the rules for people to understand what
we're talking about quake would have
well it has maps and on those maps like
this is where the rocket launcher is is
where the railgun is is where the health
is this is where the mega armor is and
you had to know where these things were
and that they would regenerate every X
amount of seconds and so you're managing
not just your fighting but you're also
managing the resources so you're running
around and trying to control the map and
trying to control the mega health and
trying to control where the armor is and
don't let the guy get the railgun don't
let the guy get the rocket launcher and
in doing that it's this incredible game
of strategy as well as like fast twitch
aiming and there's so many factors going
and the masters would have at times such
that they're just running to where it's
gonna spawn and a half second before
they get there it responds they run over
it it's theirs and it's gone and the
difference between the top level players
is something you see in competitive
games a lot even today is you get the
sense of the big fish in the small pond
you know it's like I am the I totally
beat all of my friends asses and are the
best on the best player anybody's ever
seen in my tiny little area and then you
put them in the big pond i with some of
the professional players and they just
they get nothing
you know they wind up not being able to
land
shot there is that much difference of
course you see that in everything
martial arts where you get by the dojo
hero in one place that then goes in
actually rolls with professional and
just finds out that they weren't all
they thought they were and there's even
more layers of that in games because
you're not so confined to some of the
physical limits of the human body yeah
and the amount of time you can do it is
not confined to the physical limits of
the human body so there's people out
there playing 10 12 hours a day with
their thinking and sleeping and dreaming
in you know catching people with rail
shots in the middle of the air yeah that
sense when you're obsessive about
something how it does invade your dreams
and there have been a number of times in
my career when I'm learning new things
when I'm just immersed in whether it's a
new programming paradigm a new piece of
technology and I'm working 13 something
hours in a day and I go to sleep and I
have dreams about what I'm working on
that's when I know I'm really deep in
the groove of soaking in this new
information and the Dreaming is my mind
helping synthesize this into a useful
form so I can apply this in the future
and those are some things that I look
back on very very fondly when I've been
that obsessive about something that it
soaked into my dreams yeah I used to get
that with martial arts when I was
competing I would I would throw kicks in
the middle of the night and I would have
like dreams or like moving and I'd wake
up like you know and it's like thinking
that I was in the middle of a fight and
I had a real problem when we you know we
have this land room set up here with
quake on it and when we got into it
where my addiction got rece parked again
we were playing two three four hours a
day I was starting to have quick dreams
it was really weird like I don't have
dreams that I was going down corners and
dodging rockets and assists that game is
so immersive and it's so you you get
done with it and your heart is pounding
like me and Jamie and and Jeff would
play and then when when it was over we
would all be out of breath with our
heart would be raced we'd have to get up
and walk around would be like Jesus try
to shake it that's one of the real
interesting things that gets amplified
even more in virtual reality where I
when I was doing a bunch of the work on
bringing Minecraft into the gear VR
system
I am I played a bunch and I would play
with my family and it's you know it's
great when you can have your kids
playing with you and I would have the VR
headset
I'd be playing in my swivel chair
turning around I running and I had this
really weird sense where there were
times that I would remember that not as
I was playing a game but I remembered
being there I remembered like being in
that cavern and breaking through into AI
into a raining sky or I have you know
having the creeper run up behind me and
it was not the sense that I remembered
playing a video game I remembered being
there and that's this that's the power
of VR and in many ways we don't have as
intensive action games like quake in VR
partially because there's a movement
control problem where in VR you're fine
as long as you're moving in the virtual
world the same way your body is in the
real world but if you go ahead and play
a traditional game like quake and you're
removing your mouse to spin you around
you would get really sick to your
stomach quickly because parts of your
inner ear I detect motion of your
physical body and your brain correlates
what your eyes are seeing with what your
inner ear is telling you and when they
disagree that's what causes simulator
sickness now some of the theories are
that that's your brain saying you ate
something that's really bad for you and
you should get sick and throw it up I
but this idea that you can't play
traditionally like that in VR unless
you've just got an absolute iron stomach
so things like that dashing down
corridors flipping around
I am corners you don't do very well in
VR but things where you can either stand
still or move sort of in a straight line
as long as there's no acceleration the
worst things are sort of parabolic arcs
so rocket jumping and stuff in quake is
bad news in VR it's still pretty amazing
when you go do it but you do it too many
times no way you're doing that for a
three-hour stretch there without having
some problems with it
so what you're saying in terms of the
inner ear and the visual but what you're
taking individually is that when those
things are off your brain thinks maybe
you consume poison and that's why
they're off yeah that's one of the
theories because it makes your stomach
upset and people do throw up sometimes
yeah then I if you people used to do
that even just with traditional video
games where I remember in the early days
I in the early days of quake and dooms
some people would be staring intently
enough at the
screen and they would get that sense
where on a small monitor it's usually
not a problem because I am usually you
see the rest of the stable world around
you and the field of view that you pick
like traditionally we used about a
ninety degree field of view in the old
days and if you have a little monitor
here it's really only taking maybe
twenty five degrees or so of your field
of view so your brain doesn't really buy
it as I'm looking into a window in this
other world you're still kind of
controlling something and driving it
around but when you get a giant screen
and you get the field of view about
right then your brain starts picking up
and saying oh maybe I should be paying
attention to this visuals and that could
cause some people to have I you know get
simulator sickness even on the screen
but in VR where it's covering your
entire field of view and you don't have
a stable reference it can be a much
bigger problem so we we have some of
these band-aids where people start would
put cages of things in virtual reality
so you've at least got something stable
to look at and that helps a little bit
like there's a a game called omega agent
where you're flying around in a jet pack
and on the one hand this is the worst
thing to do in VR parabolic flight and
it checks all that don't do this in VR
buttons but it's still really amazingly
cool to just jetpack up and kind of
coast around down things so sometimes
you're making these trade-offs with your
body on the VR experiences I try to push
people towards the no trade-off games
okay you can sit here you can do this
amazing thing and there's no downside to
it but for the adventurous there are
these other things you can do which
might be exactly what hits the right
buttons for you but you may suffer some
for it do you guys take into account the
possibility of people getting sick and
suing cuz I think you kind of have to
right so there's a lot of I what we were
more concerned about health and safety
wise is on the new system where you can
walk around is you know people banging
into walls falling down steps and so on
so we spent a lot of effort building
this we call it The Guardian system when
you start up you basically trace out
what you say the safe area is and that's
on you if you trace out the safe area
over your staircase I am you know bad
things can happen but the idea is that I
it has a known good area it knows where
you are
so it will tell you it'll bring up this
little overlay to show you that hey
you're approaching a wall
do not be charging headlong now people
should not be sprinting in VR under
almost any circumstances but you do wind
up getting into the action on things and
something jumps it's behind you startles
you and you jump around so you need a
reasonable amount of space to do these
we call them room scale games where
you're actually walking around there's a
lot of them that are stationary that
you're expected to pretty much
standstill but there's some amazing
experiences about being able to clear
out a room walk around and just not be
on task as far as hyperaware but just
being able to soak in a space and kind
of crouch down look at things and I
always like to say that modern games
have so much artistry put into them that
is largely wasted or lost on the players
where you have the fire extinguisher
sitting in the corner that some artists
lovingly crafted for a week and you just
glance at it see the pixels and move on
but in VR you wind up saying it's like
oh I'm in this room I'm looking at this
you read you know leaned down or even
pick something up and turn it around and
look at it and you know and that's
really great but the larger spaces have
these hazards and it turns out that it's
hard to protect people from themselves
in some cases because we started saying
well what if somebody's swinging their
hand really hard I am you know we don't
we want them to be able to stop their
hand and even if we show when the hand
is really close to it they're not gonna
have time so we put in this predictive
filter to say based on the velocity of
how fast you're moving your hand maybe
we'll start showing up the boundary a
second earlier if we think you're gonna
hit it in a second we'll show the
boundary now but then everybody says I
don't want that flashing up it's
distracting me and we need to put in
parameters to turn it down and it's a
real balancing act there where a lot of
developers just kind of go in and say
turn off Guardian I'll accept the risks
for this but I yes of course the lawyers
are very concerned for this we have we
have some duty of care to the people
that are our customers there are some
interesting YouTube videos of people
playing VR not setting things up right
and like running into walls and so on
and even internally it's AI if you don't
set it up right if you if you extend it
further than you should there are people
that have smacked their knuckles into a
table or something and kind of post the
bloody knuckles picture from that but
it's on you on how conservative you want
to be with it it was interesting
I stepped outside of the what is it
called the Guardian yeah whatever it is
the the the the matrix that shows up and
you you walk through then you see the
regular world like you step out of the
virtual world and you're into the
regular world but you're seeing it
through this weird lens yeah so it's
it's black and white because it's using
the same camera it's like on the quest
there are four cameras that I am that
are pointed off in different directions
and they have two jobs to do they they
track where the headset is by looking at
the world around it they find stable
little pieces of the world and based on
where they are as you move around it can
figure out where the headset is and then
they also look at the controllers and
the controllers have little invisible IR
LEDs on it i but it takes this
black-and-white image of the world from
the four different views and it can pass
through the real world it's pretty low
res I doesn't have color but it's good
enough for important things like finding
where you put your controllers and
letting you orient yourself because
depending on what you do in VR if you
spend a couple hours in an environment
where you're turning around and moving
it can be very shocking to people when
they I sort of come out of it and they
they're in the opposite corner of the
room they thought they should be either
pointed in a different direction I
having the ability to kind of bring the
world into place especially in those
cases where you're approaching the
boundaries is it's nice is there
anything that you guys have that can or
maybe in the future can map out uneven
terrain like say if you were at a park
and there was a hill or in your backyard
or something like that we have there
various sort of surfaces you have a
sidewalk and then grass then a hill is
there ever there's a few aspects to that
I you can set up really large I am
Guardian boundaries we do have an upper
limit on it I but again some developers
have disabled that to do even larger
areas and one of the coolest experiences
that I had was at a convention last year
an artist had made a basically a VR
sculpture that was really big it was
like 50 feet long I am you were inside
this kind of aquarium looking thing in a
workshop and we sketched out this giant
boundary and I walked around like I
walked literally from room to room in
virtual reality again there
few people have the space to set
something like this up in their house
but we were at a convention center and
the ability to walk through a door in
virtual reality get down on my hands and
knees and crawl through a crawl space
into another magical little area that
was really something I mean it's not
clear how we can carry that over to
other people but the idea of doing it
outside I am there's a few technical
issues with it we're bright sunlight
overpowers the little tiny LEDs on the
controllers so while it's possible to
sort of stop down the exposure on the
cameras for tracking the headset if it's
reasonably bright you're not going to be
able to resolve the controller's which
breaks some things but people have found
that if you get the right overcast day I
am and you've got the right environment
you can go out to like a tennis court or
or a big field or something stretch out
a large boundary and explore some fairly
sizable things now really accurate I
determination of the world Facebook
reality labs has done a lot of research
for almost what is the absolute limit of
what we could possibly do with the
sensors for building the most accurate
representation of the world and it's
pretty damn good when you get to the
point where they could take over in a
really cluttered room like this scan the
world for all of this and they could
make real 3d representations so you
could then be good enough that I can go
ahead and pick up individual things here
but it's still it's pretty expensive to
do that both in terms of the needs some
slightly different sensors they have to
project more structured light out of the
world takes a lot more calculation to do
it it's too much for this generation of
products here but certainly that's
something that we're looking at in the
future where eventually we want to not
have that one step of drawing out the
Guardian you just want it to be both I
am sensible enough that it can tell
what's going on in the environment and
sort of smart enough to tell what's a
hazard because you want that magic of
you just put it on it does everything
and it just works we're not there yet
but that is sort of on the roadmap for
where we want to go so you think there
will be a time whether the technology
will allow you to maybe possibly have
several filter layers like you can see
the whole world and it would be more of
an augmented reality sort of sort of a
situation or the whole world disappears
and then it could be
virtual yes so there's we have a lot of
debates about I am both the useful
things that you might do there and then
some real technical aspects where in
terms of augmented reality this idea
that we all buy into this future vision
of a world where you've got something
that's this you know that feels like
sunglasses that you put on and you can
pull up all your information and maybe
it clouds over into a virtual experience
there are still I fundamentally unsolved
problems in display technology to do the
magic thing that we would really like
from all of that so you step back to
saying that well what you saw in quest
when you saw the world through that
obviously it's low res it's low
framerate it's not good but we could fix
all that you could say let's go higher
is color high refresh rate and you could
make a we'd call that a pass through
rather than a see through augmented
reality system and we could absolutely
build that technology and we could make
that pretty good but then it comes down
to what do we expect sort of the user
story to be if you had something like
that I would you be wearing this boxy
thing you know out into the world riding
the bus with it doing different things
we have a little bit of a hard time
seeing that kind of socially acceptable
way that you're running around going
about your life with sort of the
shoebox-sized thing on your head it's an
open question where everybody agrees if
it came down to sunglasses everybody in
the world is gonna want something like
that if it gives them these magical
abilities and it can turn into virtual
reality or augmented reality it's an
open question whether there's an
in-between layer if we get down to the
point where it's something like swim
goggles or very thin I'm sort of ski
goggles something that's half or a
quarter of the volume of what we've got
here would that be something that people
would want to wear for long periods of
the day I lean towards no but we haven't
built it so we don't know yet I am and
then the question of what you want to do
with that in the augmented reality world
where people make these interesting
little demos where all right we've
mapped the world in this incredible
detail now we can flood it with water we
can do a simulation of all of this isn't
this cool or we can turn it into we can
reskin your world as Bilbo Baggins
hobbit hole or something and I am
skeptical of the broad utility of a lot
of these things where like today there's
a ton of AR apps that you can get on
your cell phone you can hold your phone
up and kind of look at
and interesting little things happen
well poke Mongo is an interesting thing
where that actually has more of a point
for it and the augmented reality side of
it is very small but the things that
actually augment onto the world I
haven't seen anything that I've found
really compelling they're interesting
technologies but I think that the I'm
I'm still betting more on the fully
immersive experiences where you take
over and this idea of bringing part of
it into the world I'm a little more
skeptical on but I I don't know how it's
gonna play out but that's the concept
behind magic leap right yeah and magic
leap was very very hyped up a couple of
years ago but it hasn't really come to
fruition yet in terms of like a consumer
product that people could mean
remembered they had the little girl and
there was a ballerina that was dancing
on her hand and it was like was this
gonna happen so the problem with magic
leap was they they had a lot of the
augmented reality videos I you wind up
with things that are synthetically
created and they're not really what the
product does and they oversell what they
the actual capabilities are and that's a
slippery slope there where you want to
sell your vision in some way and you
know you're really you're very rarely
showing exactly what the product does
but they showed something that led
people to believe it was much more than
it actually was
but even before magically Microsoft had
been selling the hololens for a few
years and it's turned out that they have
some real wins in AI in some enterprise
applications for training and for people
like working on jet engines and stuff
where it's an expensive product and
costs thousands of dollars for these
things I not gonna spend that to get a
it's got a fairly narrow field of view
it's not a great gaming experience they
have a few things that you can do with
that but if it's something that helps
you do your job and you're a high paid
specialist for something it's a tool you
know it's something that that has value
there but that's the state that we are
in with AR today where there are some
devices that are providing some
legitimate value but they are
essentially they're like socket wrenches
they're our tool you get when you need
to do a specific job where the world
that we want to be in is it's something
you put on and it's essentially a part
of you where I want something where I
roll out of bed instead of grabbing my
normal see-through glasses I grab my
augmented reality glasses and then they
do something useful for me for six
18 hours and that's where you know two
hours is not enough we have a few of
there's a few companies that have made
things that are sunglasses form factor
that can do some little things with a
display but they run out of battery very
quickly but you want something that you
can use all day long and if it becomes
something that is so automatic like cell
phones or augmentations of our power
right now the fact that we can go look
anything up super quickly if you have
that ability and it doesn't even mean
pulling your phone out of your pocket if
you can access information I adjust by
potentially even just thinking about it
I mean there is work serious work going
on about brain computer interfaces where
you could imagine having these glasses
and even if it was all it did was say
zooming in say it was just supervision
if you had the ability to just think
zoom and it would zoom in and for
something that would be a product right
there it could grow into this
augmentative world and annotate
everything and do all of that other
stuff later but I'm a believer that this
sense of giving you a new power giving
you a new physical ability and either it
needs to be ultra intuitive I mean maybe
there is something where I'm just
tapping your wrist or some super super
fast low latency interaction but ideal
would be something like I you know brain
computer interface maybe it's some eye
tracking or even teeth clicking or
something that you could do but if it
just became so natural that just like
you think you turn your head to go look
at something if you just do this thing
and you zoom in on it you get more
information that would be pretty magical
that sense of augmenting human
capability have you paid attention to
this Elon Musk neural link thing so I
actually went out to visit the neuron
the neural link company I was like the
week before they did their big public
announcement I spent a whole day there
kind of deep diving with a bunch of
their technical people and it is
exciting stuff because it is you know I
I like to use the word bold for things
like that where it's not just this
incremental advance where it's just
taking something fixing a few of the
flaws and going out it is visionary
looking to the future where the
potential upside of this about being
able to make the whole automated
electronic world something that is
directly accessible on both input and
output to your brain is really
or Keable and i what they've done I mean
there's a lot of people where you can
say it's like well other companies might
have these capabilities i but clearly
they are at the cutting edge I could
argue how far above or behind other
companies they might be but I think it's
going to largely work to some degree
here and they're gonna be working with
people that are seizure patients people
that are in many cases profoundly
disabled and they don't expect it's
gonna work forever when they put it in
there are all these problems with the
brain I kind of rejecting implants
eventually and there are people have
done experiments like this for quite a
while it starts off with just one neuron
you stick in one sensor or one actuator
and in the neuro-link case now they've
got tens of thousands that they can put
in so much much higher fidelity even if
it doesn't work forever and they're
still working out the different the
coatings tactics and different
installation procedures I somebody is
going to go in there and be go from
being profoundly disabled to probably
being able to play a video game you know
being able to sort of directly control
things with your mind where you start
off being able to do maybe just very
slowly driving a cursor and people have
done this again for years where you can
slowly move a mouse cursor or something
and figure out a click thing but here
when you have tens of thousands of
neurons going in you could go from this
very slow moving something to doing this
deep analog multi-dimensional like
playing a symphony with your brain
output potentially and then potentially
feeding information in in a way that we
can't right now that you could have this
sort of tactile feel to it do you
remember lawnmower man yeah vaguely that
was the idea yeah I've thought to myself
sometime I should go back and watch that
because I literally have not watched
that since it came out when I was a
teenager and the VR is laughable at this
point and everything but it should be
good for a chuckle well I'm it was a
clunk I think it was a clunky movie but
the idea was based on a Stephen King
book and the Stephen King book where
there was a guy who was sort of slow and
they did something to him and all of a
sudden he became some super genius
almost godlike character like if this
neural link stuff does work and you can
take a person with profound disabilities
and all
sudden they become the smartest human
beings on the planet that would be
really weird so I know that was one of
the pitches that Ilan was making early
on that Ilan is very concerned about
artificial intelligence and very part of
neural link was this pitch that well
maybe we can supercharge humans in a way
that the a I won't run away so far or we
can at least interact with them on a
more level playing field I am less I am
saying right about that I am I that
seems a little bit more of a reach to me
because I suspect that okay even if you
do put a million neurons in when we're
making artificial general intelligence
a--'s they're gonna have billions and
billions of these different connections
and I think that it might be many steps
above what a human could be but if AI
becomes possible and takes off and I am
a believer in artificial general
intelligence I think it's probably not
as far off as many many people believe
that it is likely to be able to
accelerate in advance faster than even a
neural link to human would be able to
how far away do you think we are from
artificial general intelligence so by
nature I'm an optimist I am you know I
tend to I to underestimate how long
things take but on the other hand as a
programmer I've usually been able to say
well maybe I missed my estimate by 50%
while everybody else blew it by a
hundred percent or something I think
that we will have we will potentially
have unclear signs of AGI maybe as soon
as a decade from now
Wow now lots of people disagree the
majority of scientists working on it
think it's like oh it's gonna be at
least a few decades and you still have a
few holdouts that say oh it can't happen
at all but I'm a strict materialist I
think that you know our minds are just
our body in action and there's no reason
why we can't wind up simulating that in
some way I am so I don't think the
question of how far off there's a lot of
numbers that you can play like the the
brain has something like 85 billion
neurons in it in the room they have
something like 10,000 connections
between it and you can multiply those
out and compare them to what we have in
computer memory and processing time and
you can say that yeah
within ten years those curves should
have crossed but I would even go so far
as to say most of those are probably not
completely necessary we know lots of
biological systems like we understand
the processing that goes on a lot in the
visual side and we don't need nearly as
many computer transistors as neurons
that are used for processing some of
those early layers so I suspect that
even today some of the government
supercomputers that the biggest the top
500 list that they have those are
remarkably I probably useful for doing
Intel it artificial intelligence work
where for a long time for decades I
thought that was sort of just I am
national chest-thumping the top 500
computers because so many of them they
relied on replacing what used to be the
old big iron Cray vector supercomputers
and they really weren't very easy to
program most programs people want to use
you can't run it on a supercomputer and
just be a lot faster one of the shocking
things most people don't really
appreciate is the fastest way to do most
single threaded applications is an
overclocked gaming computer today you
can't go spend a million dollars and buy
a computer that will do many tasks
faster than what you can just run on a
gaming computer and this is not at all
the way things were for decades where
for a long time
you would go spend your millions of
dollars on a Cray supercomputer and all
of your code would run faster than
anything you can get but it turned out
that the the processors that you wind up
using in high-end gaming systems are in
many cases the fastest or in all cases
at least close to us fast for certain
serial applications so the only thing
else you can do is pile lots more of
them together and these big computers
are football field-sized AI systems
they're just racks and racks of GPUs and
CPUs and nowadays for a long time I'd be
like well what would you I would think
how could I make a faster quake map
build or something on one of those
because we would sometimes have hours
and hours spent processing this and I at
one point we had a computer that was
almost in the top 500 I'm at it's
software just for making our Maps I but
I would looked at a lot of these
supercomputers and like how these are
terrible not very useful for what we
want i but now as I look at AI work and
I think that well if you're just doing a
whole bunch of these I kind of general
matrix multiplies
that computer right there is probably
pretty good so I would suspect that you
could do something if we had the right
algorithms the right training schedule
and the right time to run through it
that it's probably possible on some
systems today and it'll just still take
many years for the right algorithms to
wind up being developed the right
training regimens to be run and faster
cheaper hardware and why did it make it
more economical to run all the
experiments because in so many cases the
trick is not that the minimum
requirements exist but that a thousand
people have thrown themselves at the
wall of a problem most of the bounced
off and failed but eventually somebody
gets through now what about quantum
computing is that something that could
potentially break the bottleneck that we
have with Moore's Law so I don't I am
NOT an expert on quantum computing and I
I think that I many times I beat myself
up about it where there's some
simulators online where you can go and
work on it and I should work through the
exercises of doing the basic factoring
algorithms on quantum computing but I
you know my read on it right now is that
it's probably not directly useful for
most of the artificial intelligence
tasks the big things that people worry
about that are for things like breaking
cryptography breaking the different
hashes and encryption methods that it's
possible that in many ways that's almost
a terrible technology because it's a
technology that doesn't solve so many of
the problems that you'd like it to solve
and it does solve one of the problems
you kind of wish nobody was able to
solve I am so I like breaking all the
encryption you know like if somebody
winds up I with a quantum computer that
they achieve quantum supremacy and it
runs past all of our traditional
computers and all of a sudden they can
break all of the all of the secure
socket layer stuff break everybody
signatures impersonate any public key
sign stuff there's no upside to this
that's all downside and all bad things
they're gonna come from that while it's
not gonna make your video encoding go
any faster and it's probably not going
to help artificial intelligence in many
ways so I haven't found a whole lot to
get me really excited about quantum I am
computing it may just be that yeah and
with all these cases why I beat myself
up about not learning more about it
because in most cases when presented
with some capability there are so
to figure out how to apply it usefully
to the things that you really want in
fact I consider that almost the essence
of engineering engineering is figuring
out how to do what you want with what
you've actually got and if somebody
gives anytime somebody gives me new
hardware usually I can figure out some
useful way to do things that I want with
it even if it's not immediately obvious
and maybe quantum computing plays out
that way but I am it is still definitely
the domain of big labs with cryogenic
cooling and all that stuff so hmm it
just hasn't been at the top of my radar
now when we talk about technology and
you talk about the exponential increase
in the powers of technology is it
possible that we could come to a point
in time somewhere in the future where
there's no way to encrypt anything where
it's not possible to hide things where
we won't be able to do banking online we
won't be able to have digital currency
because virtually everyone will have
access to all the information because
essentially digital currency or anything
it's encrypted it's just information
right it's just ones and zeros is it
possible that technology will reach a
point in time where borders and
boundaries are impossible so I one thing
that a lot of people don't appreciate
about cryptography is there's a really
straightforward way to make completely
unbreakable cryptography and that's
what's called a one-time pad where if
you essentially have I'm you know a long
you know a very long set of data and
it's private as long as nobody else has
it you can encrypt anything with it and
if it was generated randomly properly
you always have to worry about flaws in
your random number generation or your
random number source but a properly
generated one-time pad is unbreakable
now the problem is it's finite so you
have a fixed amount of it and all of the
really serious spycraft would use
something like that where you've got a
one-time pad you can send a message
through it in the old days when you were
manually doing it you might only have a
book with a certain number of pages and
once it's over it's gone and you can't
get more without returning to base but
this is always a possibility and as
we've seen storage densities increase so
much the fact that you can get a little
micro SIM card that's holding hundreds
of gigabytes now which is pretty
remarkable
you could imagine a world
like if we did have this quantum
apocalypse where all of these short and
512 1024 bit keys whatever all of those
just gets smashed irrevocably I could
imagine a world where I mean heck maybe
people start implanting the one time pad
inside people so whatever you know
whatever you need to encrypt that's
coming from you has this you know this
clear unbreakable key that you're
working with do you think that we're
gonna have things implanted in our body
soon that allow you to interface with
computers or technology or wireless
Internet I think that it's possible that
it will I it would we have people that
want to do that right now that wasn't
she implanted a Tesla chip in her arm so
that she could just get close to her car
on the door would open so in fact one of
the things that talking with the neural
link people the idea that of course
right now you start off you say you take
somebody profoundly disabled and you put
them in a laboratory and you try to
train them how to use this but we were
all saying that well what you really
need is a programmer to get this
interface you need to be able to let a
programmer actually program themselves
on their interface and you will make a
hundred times more progress than this
you know previously disabled person
coming into the lab for a couple hours a
day and it was funny the conversation
there where one of their guys was like
yeah well give them the basic rule so
they don't stroke themselves out and
like okay yeah that's kind of important
talk about health and safety rules there
but I yeah if you start getting a
programmer in there that starts running
this like alright instead of just going
through these basic exercises they run
everybody through you really understand
exactly what you're doing and you change
it you write the code as you're
experiencing it and there are probably
people volunteering or that are ready to
go do that to have something like that I
read an article sometime after that
about one of the early neurosurgeons
that did implant himself with some
electrodes he had to go to one of these
I fringe countries that didn't have any
ethical guidelines around the the
medical practices or what everybody paid
a neurosurgeon in one of those countries
to implant an electrode into his head
and he even had some complications
afterwards as like now there's a
dedicated researcher although
interestingly there there's a whole
history of a lot of medical science
where you would get people that would
wind up having the conviction to do the
experiments on themselves and you know
got to respect that where it's one thing
to you know make a grant proposal to set
up a study to do all of this and it's
another one to say damn it I am so
confident in this I'm gonna have someone
cut a hole in my skull and implant this
in me so we can learn the lessons
what was his complications to your
murder he had some I have some problems
with speech afterwards he had to learn
how to do it like half of his face had a
little bit of a sag to it from the get
in there on so yes it was life effecting
changes as a result of going with that
and this was him I don't offhand I but
it what this was it was a wired article
I think from a number of years back but
this was like a single electrode it was
just doing very one bit or one analog
value computation and he had a little
transponder kind of put in under the
skin of his skull had a big lump on his
head with that while interesting again
the add the neural link stuff all modern
high tech where you kind of power it
with RF through the skull and it's got a
little plug and I one of the first when
you on first kind of approached me about
I kind of talking with them about that
the idea on the thinking which was kind
of insightful was this idea that the i/o
levels that they were doing on the
neural link or they were planning on
doing with that was fairly close to what
we do on virtual reality where okay
we've got theoretically maybe up to a
million inputs here and a million
outputs and I can run those numbers and
say well that's kind of like the cameras
that we're taking in and the display
that we're we're putting out and I made
the point that well you probably could
run that off of like Qualcomm chip that
we've got in here you'd set it all up as
like turn them into what are called mipi
lanes for the input and output make the
inputs look like a camera and make the
outputs look like a display screen and
you could then run software on something
like what we use here to drive your
brain like the programmer could then
kind of start running some of those
experiments with it well it's so
fascinating being on the outside
watching all this stuff come to fruition
because I remember when virtual reality
was sort of it was something that was
tossed around in the 80s and we talked
about the future and that was one of the
things that people were really concerned
about or looking forward to in the
future was virtual reality but the
technology really wasn't there yeah so I
have stories from in the early days I
did software every game from Wolfenstein
doom and quake
we had at least one vr entrepreneur that
wanted to work with us I because finally
here was content because they were like
everybody had this vision of VR like
it's this hazy vision of the future
where cool stuff happens when you put
the helmet on but they didn't have this
concrete instantiation of like well what
do you actually do and then people saw
the 3d games like oh that's what you
want to do inside the virtual reality
helmet so they would come up and they'd
want to basically work with us licensed
the technology and every time I looked
at these and like oh this it just isn't
gonna work out I in many cases they were
people that were very they were high on
enthusiasm but a little low on the raw
technical necessities to make something
like this happen because really it was
too early I mean there were systems that
if you had unlimited money you could get
a big SGI refrigerator-sized infinite
reality system that could render images
that could be interesting but people
talk about the current resolution limits
here or like the original I the original
DK one kind of the views for there those
headsets back then they were the
resolution of remember the original
pixel Doom I like 320 by 240 sort of
resolutions there but wrapped around
your head somebody called them football
sized pixels you know like you've got
this big blurry blob off to the side so
it was never gonna happen in those early
days so we always made the point of
saying well okay we'll license the stuff
to you but I know I wouldn't put a dime
of my investment money into something
like that because I just thought it was
too early and then here we are a couple
decades later and the future has arrived
yeah it seems like it was about a decade
ago that people started really taking it
seriously again but where the technology
had caught up to the vision that so it's
I I think that I think we can date all
of it to the demo that I gave at e3 I am
which had the doom 3 as they've kind of
running there because it was amazing
talking to people I got into it several
months before that and I had this
thought okay I had just finished and
finished rage the last game that I had
worked on there and and I was like all
right between each project I would do
research I would take a time to go ahead
and explore some new technology whether
it was in the game rendering or
something related to it and I thought
well virtual reality back in I remember
dealing with that in the nine
Deas spent 20 years surely they've
sorted this out by now you know it was a
matter if the technology was terrible
back then but here we are closing in a
million times faster processors surely
somebody's just sorted this out and I
was shocked when I went and I looked
through I surveyed everything and it
really wasn't there was a cottage
industry of people that would serve
basically Department of Defense I
contracts that would make these very
expensive systems that were you know
tends to in some cases like a hundred
and fifty thousand dollars for some of
these big things and they weren't even
very good it was it was offensive to me
as an engineer where I look at the
capabilities of what's possible you know
I I say this is our display this is our
processing these are our sensors what is
the limit I always talk about the speed
of light calculations like if everything
was perfect how good could it be and I
could look at what we had and say it
could be a whole hell of a lot better
than what we have here what people are
shipping and that are charging these
very high prices for it and so that was
when I started coupling things together
myself I've you know and that's what led
to working with you know Palmer at the
start of oculus and led to where we are
today what year was that
so 2011 in the first work I think that's
so recent yeah that's crazy so yeah less
than a decade and now we have it down to
a one wearable headset that sits on your
head my my friend Duncan's first unit
was connected to a computer and you had
cables that you would trip over and I
think there was a backpack involved as
well so there's still some reason to
want to use the computer where one of
the points that I like to make is that I
while cell phone technology which is
definitely what these stand-alones run
on is astounding and how much power
we've gotten out of these but your
high-end gaming PC rig I it's a
difference of it's 50 times more
powerful it is just way way way more
powerful and if you just want to make
something happen quickly and easily it's
easy on the PC where you have to sweat
pretty hard to make some intense things
happen on the cellular systems I am and
one of the interesting things is I make
the point to people that we are so used
to computers just getting faster and
faster and they have for you know for
decades and decades our entire life
basically but we are approaching the end
of that people talk about the end of
Moore's law like you mentioned and I've
had to tell people that while we've
still got a lot more power to come the
next decades still going to be good it
is very likely barring some magical new
technology which fingers crossed maybe
we get but you will probably never get
the cellphone technology I to the point
that a modern gaming PC is which on the
one hand
sounds like obviously that's a different
thing but on the other hand if you've
been here through this million X
increase in performance it's a little
bit of a downer to think that no we just
can't wait another 10 years and we'll
have everything we could do there
available in the systems so it does mean
a little bit of a cultural change too to
start thinking more about performance
rather than just say throw everything at
it and then and that used to be what I
did in the early days I did we would
make these bleeding-edge things where
only a few people at the start had good
enough computers or people would get it
and they were running at a low frame
rate it made them want to go upgrade
their computer and wanted to go get the
latest thing or buy a GPU I you know do
the thing to make the game better but we
are we are approaching the limits of
what's going to be happening with that I
am so you have to be better you know you
have to be a more conscientious
developer you have to I start paying
attention to all the different aspects
of performance that on the PC you can
still largely gloss over and I like that
I mean as an old-school optimizer where
I always appreciated the challenge
that's why my entire time at oculus I've
been focused on these mobile systems
where in many ways it's easier to do
spectacular things on the PC but mobile
is super important and it's more of a
challenge you know it winds up fitting a
little bit better for me but there are
generations of game developers
especially now that have been have grown
up making PC titles where it's easy and
they have to educate themselves quite a
bit now to go ahead and make the step
down to something with less than 1/10 or
you know less than a 50th in some cases
of the raw power when you're talking
about the end of Moore's law what what
is the limitation that we're facing
technologically like why is it going to
wire there why is there going to be a
point where they can't get any more
powerful so the way other chips work is
you have these I am you know they wind
up sketching out basically
wires onto the silicon chips and they
have gotten so small that the wire that
the currents flowing through is a
handful of atoms wide which is just
astounding if you think about it you
know these are these fundamental
elements of matter and the wire is the
small integer number of atoms wide now
in theory you can keep going down and
say well maybe we can make a one atom
wide electrical path but you wind up
running into eventually all these
quantum effects where if you make a very
narrow wire and you pack them very close
together you have two wires there an
electron won't necessarily stay on that
one wire of conductor that you want it
to be on because of the way I quantum
mechanics work it is going to wind up
jumping they call it quantum tunneling
there is a percentage chance and quantum
is all about randomness like that but an
electron flowing here there's going to
be this chance that it just teleports
essentially to a nearby wire it takes
this discrete quantum jump to another
wire and this is reality it's shocking
it's not intuitive people have a hard
time kind of grasping a lot of this but
quantum tunneling is a real thing and we
are bumping into quantum limits they can
still shrink more than we are right now
where we're down at seven nanometers in
the latest stuff although there's all
sorts of issues with marketing speak
about exactly how they measure it but
they're still getting smaller and
there's still room to get smaller still
but the end is in sight it can't go to
much and one of the things that becomes
an issue is just the economics of it
each generation has gotten more and more
expensive if you went back I am thirty
years there were a whole bunch of
semiconductor places that could fab I'm
you know different chips you could go
ahead and have a design and you could
shop it out to a whole bunch of
different places find the one that
worked best for you but it's come down
to the point now where it cost billions
of dollars to make a new fab and at the
high end process as you're left with
just DSM C Samsung and Intel
I'm very few companies you know AMD held
on for a while until they spun theirs
out I and it's it's so expensive and it
that's one of the challenges where they
will have full confidence that we'll see
a couple more node shrinks I am so
still make chips cheaper somewhat faster
more cores on them but it is going to
get an end of the line but I hold out
hope for potential other things you know
there are directions that you know maybe
you have your carbon nanotube wires or
you're starting able to be able to do
some things with photonic processing in
different ways there are possible outs
for it but I don't know that any of them
are sure enough thing to really be
counting on at this point it's so hard
for a dummy like me to wrap my head
around that but when you're talking
about these wires so if these wires it's
size dependent when they get too small
then this quantum tunneling becomes
completely unpredictable so it is so I
if you draw out like a probability
density function of like you've got a
particle and you like to think about
particles as being like this hard little
billiard ball that's sitting here in
this specific place that's sort of they
you know the vision that you used to see
in grade school textbooks about here's
an atom you've got these billiard balls
in the middle surrounded by the
electrons moving around but in actuality
they're really these I these
distribution functions they it sounds so
weird but they have a chance at being in
all of these different places and this
is not a curve that goes to zero
there is a nonzero chance that a given
atom you know could wind up being a
macroscopic distance away but there is a
real chance that it could wind up being
a few atoms away so the you know the
electron moving around at the edge of
this wire if it just says well I've got
some chance of being over here and if
you've got billions of these or
quadrillions probably of electrons
moving around in this even if it's a
small chance eventually it's going to
jump over there and enough of them jump
over and all of a sudden you've got a
wrong bit you've got a mistake so we
start fighting all of that by doing
error correcting codes and doing ways
that there's this whole set of
technology about how you work with
unreliable systems which starts getting
starts it should start making you feel a
little bit uneasy that okay we're gonna
have this error rate but we're going to
buy this carefully crafted codes allow
ourselves to constantly be failing
constantly having errors and still
getting the right answer in a
statistical enough case now there's a
lot of things like the way your cell
phone works with the way the radio
signal is I interpreted there's
a lot of things that do work in this
sort of probabilistic way but when
people are used to computers as being
this accurate thing where you always get
the right answer that sense of moving to
something that has a larger chance or is
a more probabilistic computation still
feels a little bit sketchy in some ways
now do you keep tabs on latest cellular
technology as well I mean I know you're
a coder and you code for games but do
you keep tabs on all the various
incremental increases in cellular
technology and so it's interesting right
now where we have a lot of 5g companies
then I am they've sort of got a problem
of how to sell 5g where fundamentally
it's just a bigger pipe to to everyone's
computers and it should be this
relatively boring thing but they need a
way to kind of make it sexy in some way
and several of them want VR to be that
way where you know how can we use VR in
a way that that leverages the five g m--
experience and it's not a spectacular
fit because i many of the things like
you know say beats a ver that uses no
data transfer it's like it all it does
is check your spot on the leaderboard
after you're done 5g does nothing at all
for that but there are some things that
you can look at with the immersive media
like playing 360 3d videos hive where
it's like okay it would be nice to have
more bandwidth here but it's not that
it's made possible by 5g it's just 5g
will give more people a reliable 20
megabit bandwidth or something than they
have on the current systems
it's a tough marketing problem for them
we're changing your cellular
infrastructure each one where you have
to go into tens of thousands of
specializations and pull out the racks
and replace them it's very very capital
intensive and they would like to be able
to have some cool marketing ploy to make
people you know think this is great
switch carriers over to this where the
bottom line is it gives you more
bandwidth and perhaps more importantly
it does cut the latency more it's
possible that things like cloud gaming
over 5g networks may be more of a thing
the idea of actually playing games
instead of installing them locally they
run in data centers and they can just go
ahead and wirelessly get to you with
low enough latency too so that in many
cases you wouldn't be able to notice
when you're watching this from the
outside and you're seeing all this
technology develop are you concerned at
all when you see how addicted people are
to their phones because this like your
games are very addictive in the best
ways right the quake is super addictive
it's really fun it's great to play and
that's why it's addictive because you
just won't get that charge that rush to
get back in there but the odd thing to
me about cell phone addiction is there's
not much thrill it's a weird addiction
we're just constantly checking and
nothing's coming back like people are
just constantly checking their email and
their their Twitter messages their DMS
and YouTube videos but there's not a lot
coming back at you I'm I'm concerned I
see this thing where you'll go to a
place and you'll see 80% of the people
just looking at their phones and not
interacting with people do you ever like
look at that and go where's this going
so I do think about this in a way that
because this is one of these things
where I recognize it in some other
people where I think I probably do
interact with things a little bit
differently and I am sometimes conscious
of the fact that most people don't think
about things the way I do and it's clear
that yes a lot of people just I they get
rage out of Twitter and I did I can see
it's some people it's probably bad for
them doing some of these social media
things but I mean I I get inspiration
out of Twitter I mean my feet I'm going
through I'm seeing brilliant scientists
new research developments wonderful art
from people hard workers developing
products and I just look at this as like
this is this amazing set of human beings
that are building the future and I've
got this window into their mind it winds
up being a very positive thing for me
but I do see the people that just wind
up having I that it is a negative aspect
for them and I don't know what to do
about that because I I mean talking
about people issues are obviously not my
strong suit I'm the nuts and bolts erm
bits and bytes technology person and
social challenges I mean that's one of
the things that probably over you know
over decades I've just come to be
more at peace with the fact that I
probably do think a bit differently than
most people I don't expect them to you
know to think necessarily like I do and
in many ways that keeps me from being
upset at a lot of people and just say
well people are different they're not
going to process these things the same
way that I do but yeah I can see it as
potentially a problem but I do think
also there's this ability for people to
I people always want to say it's okay
put down your phone why aren't you
living in the real world and there's
another aspect of that where for many
people the world that you get in the
virtual world whether it's on your phone
or all the way to VR the whole reason
you do that should be because it's
better than the world that you're
choosing to step away from and again
it's harder for many people that are in
an elite thought-leader position if your
life is awesome in every way then yeah
you don't need that much from the
virtual world whether it's on a cell
phone or virtual reality I mean if
you've been you know courtside backstage
pitlane whatever if you've done all of
these things in real life the VR version
of it is not going to be that compelling
and if you saw people you know fixated
on all of that you'd probably think
those people are not living in reality
they should just be living in reality
but for so many people I you know what
they get the people on the other side of
the phone that they're interacting with
that's red that's where they'd rather be
you know the fact that people can find
their tribe out of the billions of
people in the world even if they live in
some podunk town in the Midwest I I
think that's a really wonderful thing
and so while yes there is a negative
tail on one side from it i am i think
that this connecting everyone is largely
a good thing on net there are downsides
maybe there should be things we should
be doing to mitigate the downsides but I
think this connection of humanity is on
that a positive thing I tend to agree
with you that it is a positive thing I
think philosophically I think the way we
understand each other the way we
communicate it's very radically
different than our grandparents and all
of it seems to be moving in a place
where we understand each other better
and you're gonna have your side effects
like Twitter rage and and social media
bias and you know these confirmation
bias groups or appie
just they sit in these echo chambers and
reiterate the same ideas over and over
again in each other and you're also
going to get people that are
understanding cultures understanding
each other understanding psychology
understanding the way the mind works and
getting access to information at a rate
that's unprecedented in terms of the
knowledge that you can get like just
just being able to Google things that's
you know and nobody you know nobody can
actually give them credit for it and
like Mark Zuckerberg and the Facebook
leadership they talked about the mission
is to connect the world and you know of
course it's like oh okay
of course the Facebook CEO is gonna be
mouthing these things but like I really
legitimately do think that the Facebook
leadership is doing this because they
think that's a positive thing and I
agree with them now I'm not a very
social person I'm an introvert I'm a
hermit mode sort of person so much of
the time but I think that this is again
a good thing that connecting more people
giving them the opportunity to find
people that they wouldn't otherwise be
interacting with people they wouldn't
even have known existed in many cases I
think will come out of this you know
looking back decades in the future there
will have been all the tragic things
that happened with social media but on
net it's gonna be good now when you say
you're a hermit I mean that there's that
that sort of really lends itself to
coding right because coding is an
exorbitant amount of time just staring
at a screen how much time do you think
per day like when you're in full code
mode you spend like if you're developing
something how much time do you spend
just staring at a screen so this is an
interesting thing where at least once a
year I get pulled into some debate about
overwork and bad working conditions and
things where some people you know you
know the way I people always wind up
extrapolating sort of unacceptably where
people think oh I work 18-hour days or
something and I have to say no I never
worked 18-hour days because I know my
productivity falls off a cliff after 13
hours I am you know that's about the
longest that I can do any effective kind
of computer work and the key to even
being able to get an effective 13 hours
is having multiple tasks that you can
switch between rather than just kind of
sitting heads down grinding beating your
head against one specific topic but I
you know I've been for most of my career
now I like working a 60-hour workweek
I like being productive I you know
nowadays I have I have family and kids
and I don't I usually miss that target
by a bit now but I if I ever don't hit
50 hours a week I feel I'm being a
slacker I am you know I like building
things I like creating things and making
forward progress this sense of in some
small way I'm helping build the future
you know I'm proud of the work that I do
now in a big company like oculus or in
facebook is now I'm I probably only get
to spend about 50% of my time actually
programming the other half is being in
meetings trying to convince people about
things pushing on strategy doing all
that type of stuff I don't actually
manage anyone I'd be a poor manager at
best I can lead by example and provide
some kind of inspiration to follow
behind but I've never been good at
trying to figure out how to get the best
out of individual people I am but I do
love I you know I love taking a retreat
where I'll work out with with my wife
and family and say okay I'm gonna spend
a week or something and I'm just gonna
be by myself and I'm gonna do nothing
but programming I'm gonna largely cut
myself off from the internet
I am I used to do this by literally
flying to another state I my wife would
set up some I like fly me to Florida or
something and just get off and go to a
hotel near the airport so I'm not around
anybody or anything that I would
distract myself with you know lately I
you know I would wind up doing it more
locally but that's still something that
like I would worry as I got older I or
I'm doing more of this I involved with
strategy and management well am i I can
I not do that as well as I used to but
in the last couple years I would go and
take off and it's like I quickly slip
back into that where after a day of
adjustment then I'm back in it's like
alright here's my 13 hours in the day
and Here I am plowing through a bunch of
things so you would just go by yourself
and you wouldn't get weirded out by that
you don't get lonely
no like I like to think that I you know
sometimes I want to pull on that thread
a little bit and say well how would I do
in a snowed-in cab in some place I you
know would I get cabin fever or
something I and I'm pretty confident
that I mean a weeks just not that big of
not that long of a time I mean who knows
if it was a month or longer than that
I'm not sure I've never run that
experiment but I you know a week of
doing that and then coming back and
seeing my my family that's pretty great
I I did that just I'm a little over a
month ago for for this year and I got to
really kind of deep dive doing a bunch
of artificial intelligence related work
stuff that I was poking at I am and
that's it really makes me smile that
sense of like okay I can dive in and the
sense of learning new things not just
necessarily grinding on projects I mean
it's great to just be productive and say
wow I just crossed off these ten things
off the to-do list but diving into newer
fields that I'm not an expert on and
learning what all the other brilliant
people in the world have been kind of
codifying and getting the aha moments of
going through that yeah it's amazing
there's so many things to work on well
it's interesting because you're you're
so pragmatic about your time and you
have a realistic understanding of your
own physical limitations as well as what
you actually enjoy doing you know you
that you actually enjoy diving into this
work and getting this done I mean so
many people are tortured by their work
they do it but they don't like it they
just something they have to do so it's
very refreshing seeing someone who even
though you have this really unusual job
and you have this really unusual task
that you're trying to it's essentially
designed for you or you're designed for
it yeah and there are clear decisions
that you make where the majority of
technical people at some point decide to
make the pivot into some kind of
management level whether it's being a
start-up CEO or just taking a VP
position somewhere and managing other
people and there's good reasons for that
I mean an argument that I would have
with myself about how I'd seen kind of
the transition from these very low level
programming tools writing an assembly
language to writing in higher-level
languages to using application
frameworks and at some level you say
well the next level of productivity
enhancing program development is to work
with people you know you instead of
writing the code yourself you find the
team and you tell them what to work
I and that's the way most of the world
runs that type of kind of groups and
teams and hierarchies the work that
makes the world go round but it's not
what I want to do you know I don't want
to be the one doing that and in many
ways that's selfish we're at some point
if I said if I'm all about the project
if I'm all about saying that I I want to
change the world in this way by bingi
bringing this product into existence
I should just suck it up and learn how
to manage people and make that happen
I but it is selfishness that keeps me
saying it's like no I dearly love
building the things myself I don't want
to step away from that even if it would
be more effective and I know that even
if you go and do that so you I could be
maybe super effective for a couple years
of that but then my skills atrophy and
the world moves on and I'm no longer at
the cutting edge of those different
things and eventually I'm getting bad
advice to the people that I'm managing
or at least not current an optimal
advice so I I'm at peace with that I do
sometimes look at I you know other
people where like I think I think Mark
Zuckerberg made a very conscious
decision that he's going to learn to be
a top-notch CEO I'm you know he was a
programmer but he decided to largely
step away from that and says he's going
to learn how to manage a company well I
you know in many ways while Elon still
keeps his his hands dirty and
engineering to some degree most of what
he does is make his empire of companies
you know run and that's a lot of work
and I think that I mean I think he
misses it to some degree I had one time
talking with him he had a little bit of
a kind of a wistful thought about
talking about the early days of
programming things and I am willing to
I'm willing to to make that trade where
I would rather continue to do the things
that I dearly love and maybe that keeps
me from going to the next level maybe
you know maybe it prevents me from
becoming a billionaire and I'm okay with
that
I am but you know maybe I do come across
then you know some next great thing that
can productize in some way like that
well it seems like you have to have a
very specific personality to do that and
you have that personality like for me on
the outside when I look at people making
games like I've looked at I've been a
fan of games for a long time and one of
the things that's fascinated me is this
this when a game starts building
when it starts when the process of
creating game starts there's this insane
amount of work that has to get done in
the relatively short period of time and
I get anxiety thinking about other
people making games and I don't even
make games like there's been a few like
Duke Nukem right for like it was
vaporware for the longest time people
like when is this gonna come out or
daikatana was one of them I mean there's
a it was a very hyped up game everybody
was super excited it took a long time
for it to actually come to development
is actually pretty fun game when it came
out but I would get anxiety thinking
about this like my god how much work is
involved in these things making games is
really really hard and this is kind of
an interesting thing seeing the kind of
the culture at Facebook where you've got
the the big tech Titans with the
Facebook Google Apple Microsoft all that
and I you get a lot of people that roll
right into that out of college and some
of the people that have been in some of
the other industries they do look at it
it's like Oh everybody is they have it
so good at these big tech companies
where they really are everybody is taken
care of incredibly well I they get all
the different perks and I'm you know and
then you look at the game industry where
it doesn't pay as well I am saying
there's less job security and they work
you a lot harder but they have and it's
kind of a there is the problem of the
fact that when you have an industry and
this has been the way for artists
forever artists and musicians where if
you've got something that people are
passionate about and want to be involved
at and I'm supply and demand works that
works its way and you wind up in a
situation where yeah they don't have to
be paid as much but the other side of
that is it allows products that
otherwise couldn't exist to exist by
people working at that level in a way
that maybe couldn't be sustained in
other industries there are probably many
of the greatest things that were ever
made in gaming were only possible by
people throwing themselves at that level
at it and there's some serious debate
about it some people despise that about
the industry that you know nobody should
work that hard and there are people that
you know they think they're literally
should be laws against but it should
prevent people from working
hard and I always have to argue against
that where there is a you know there's a
power to obsession and like being able
to absolutely obsess over something and
throw your your life's work you know
instead of work-life balance that's your
life's work and everybody will point
back it's like well yeah that worked
great for you you you were a founder of
a company if you were in a position
where you got to make your own decisions
but is that okay to say for the 19
year-olds out of a game dev program
that's being overworked for it and I
have to always be aware that my view
into the industry was very colored by
obviously my experiences I never
actually worked inside of one of the big
EA or Activision I am studios and it's
possible that they have some valid
criticisms but I still come down on I I
think it's I think it's great when
people throw themselves at it beyond the
point of what even other people think is
reasonable they have free will they've
chosen to do that and if that's what
they think is going to help them get
close to their goals I am you know I'm
not going to try to make that impossible
for them I think what people are
concerned about those a company forcing
an employer-employee rather to work
massive hours and that well hey I want
to work in video games I'm very
passionate about working video games but
I want our life I want to be able to
work eight hours a day and which just
seems to be a reasonable amount and then
go on about with my life but you can't
really do that if you're in a game
development can you so again I my
experience isn't the experience of
everyone else but we had I am like
Michael Abrash who was my right hand in
the quake day is I am you know he came
from he came from Microsoft I have and
he had a family I he had a wife and
daughter and he would work a reasonably
normal schedule most of the time but he
was awesome so of course we were happy
to have him it's not like anybody was
brow reading Michael it's like oh you
know why aren't you staying past
midnight with us here everybody was
aware of his contribution and value now
it that may not be the case in some of
the companies today
but I suspect that if somebody if all a
person's peers know that they're doing
spectacular work and they say I'm outta
here
five I am if they're actually doing
valuable work I don't find the companies
I don't find it that credible that the
companies are going to get rid of people
doing great work just because they're
not spending 60 hours a week there but
do they give you a requirement like
you're required to work 12 hours a day
is that is that reasonable is that
happen so no I've never again I'm not
involved in the HR departments of all
these companies but the ones that I have
been I familiar with or that I've known
people doing that largely they come back
and say these people are choosing to do
this and the rejoinder is it's like oh
it's a toxic culture that makes people
want to choose to do that but I
definitely don't buy into that sort of
social engineering level of things it's
like if they're doing it they agree that
they'll wave the flag and say I am doing
this because I care so much about this I
am
yeah I don't I don't think that's a
problem now when you look at the future
of games and we know we were talking
about first-person shooters and we're
talking about oculus do you envision a
time where there'll be something where
you maybe have a unidirectional
treadmill or something along those lines
and you'll have a standalone unit in
your home with some sort of a gun well
that's very accurate where you can
actually reload it and you can get
physical exercise while you're running
around in there's a virtual quake type
environment so yeah the ready player one
vision that's a real thing that
omnidirectional treadmill but you come
into all of these you used one you know
I actually haven't played on one of
those I've played on somebody's early
prototype of AI of one but I haven't
seen the very latest stages of things
but that's another one of those things I
wouldn't put money into that because the
joy of VR is the fact it's like this
little thing you just pick it up and
carry it around as soon as you're
building material things around it
you've kind of defeated some of the
purpose of VR and I think there's this
niche for things like location-based
entertainment where you go and do things
like the void where you have the
physical gun you know you pick up the
stormtrooper gun I you go through a
physical door but I don't think that's
mass-market I am but it is a real
problem the idea of locomotion and how
you move around in VR without getting
and the omnidirectional treadmill does
sort of allow you to run in the
different directions but in terms of
getting I'm you know getting exercise
from it again I play I play beat Sabre
pretty regularly and I wind up drenched
in sweat afterwards after a long session
with that it is legitimate exercise and
that's how I tell myself I'm
multitasking I'm doing my game playing
while I'm doing some of my exercise
regimen and I and it works out great
well boxing the boxing virtual reality
games are really incredible and you
really do get a great workout the only
problem is the the knuckles are in the
wrong position like when you're holding
the handles and you're throwing punches
even if you turn your knuckles over the
gloves kind of come out like this yeah
might have to twist your hand sideways
yeah my problem with the boxing games is
they also are a tremendous exercise you
know you get in there and you run
through the drills and get in there and
you're feeling really I really kind of
worked over at the end of it but from a
purely interaction tactical level I am
you know you don't hit anything for real
right you know unless you're too close
to your Guardian boundary and you punch
the wall I so it feels I lose some of
the immersion on a lot of the VR
experiences where you're sort of miming
an interaction whether it's flipping
switches that don't exist or no or
throwing punches in boxing we might have
some room for improving that with
improved haptics in the future where
right now the controllers can make a
little buzz in your palm and that seems
to work pretty well when you slice
through something you get a little sense
of like oh I've kind of cut through it
but it doesn't give you you know that
kind of impact sense and I've suggested
that we only have small motors small
batteries so you can't put really hefty
things force feedbacks but I've
suggested that there might be something
if you were winding up a spring in some
way there that a very sharp pop of
feedback could give you that sense where
there's a lot of sort of kinesiology
things where a little hit in some way
will almost make you retract your hand
and I kind of hand-wavy suggest that
boxing games might really benefit from
something like that so you throw the
punch and you feel a pop in the palm of
your hand and that gives a much better
sense of you've actually connected for
something well I think a great solution
would actually be a real
boxing-glove with more internals because
first of all it would aid in your
exercise because it would be heavy like
if you could get an 18 ounce boxing
glove and as you're moving you're
pushing that weight in the air you you
really get a great workout that way
sometimes my son and I will take out
strap-on weights on our shoulders or in
arms for a beat saver and yeah that
really does make you think if you got
five pound weights there you're really
thinking about not flicking but finding
the optimal looping pattern that goes
through everything that's good grief
yeah good shoulders yes shoulders
especially you know keeping him up like
that yeah the boxing thing would be
great and you have plenty of room inside
that glove to put some sort of a haptic
feedback system so that you know as you
did make contact with the thing it gave
you of a sense of it in your hand the
other thing I was thinking of in terms
of martial arts is that I know you have
a background in martial arts a grappling
martial arts yeah judo yeah that
wouldn't be so good for that unless you
had some sort of a working dummy that
was programmed that I think could be
possible yeah I actually made a pitch
that what I would like to see from a
martial arts standpoint there is
immersive instructionals yes the I'm
when you set up the modern cameras right
for the 180 stereo I am VR it does give
you this extra sense of depth that for a
lot of things if you're looking at
instructional sometimes it's a little
hard to see exactly where the hands are
in the different areas and I think that
there's some value for a lot of training
aspects for virtual reality in fact
that's like Walmart's you doing a ton of
work with that and there are a lot of
companies that I am one of the side
effects of that of putting a VR headset
on is you are forced to pay attention
where if you're a company like Walmart
training people you expect most people
wind up having their phone out they're
not paying attention but put them inside
the headset they have it's almost the
Clockwork Orange stretching in the eyes
up they have no choice but to pay
attention but if it's important and
you're training them for something that
matters this is you know what you want
but when I was thinking about things
like I am I like
I remember watching some judo
instructionals for things and like male
Olympian level stuff it just goes by so
fast you just blink and it's gone I but
a lot of things that I did in VR for
some of the video stuff was giving you
almost superpower sense of time where
you freeze-frame and then being able to
like slowly frame forward frame back jog
forward and when you've got an immersive
sense here that really feels like an
interesting godlike power like you're
sitting here you're just like stop time
step step step
roll back look closely at it you know
run forward and almost anything physical
that you want to train people to do is
gonna have some benefits for things like
that and that's something that we're
we're still just really at the early
days of exploring that for making a
difference where people's training yeah
I think sparring you could have
something that would throw strikes at
you and you could move away from those
strikes and hit it leg kick it do things
along those lines the problem would be
that you're not hitting anything it's
the only problem yeah but there's
certainly some valuable things you could
do there and I have a friend that has a
stick fighting background when I showed
him beat saver he was like Oh
immediately you have to do some stick
training thing for this and yeah clearly
we're even if you're not hitting things
there but that sense of getting the
motion figuring out how to move around
the situational awareness and there's
probably some things to do there it is a
stretch to imagine some kind of a head
mounted display involved in actual
grappling in any way but I that's the
big stretch yeah because also you would
have the thing the only thing I was
thinking is you could have like a dummy
like a robot
mechanized dummy that has crude movement
like but but it does understand it can
throw punches and kicks and it's
programmed and you could kind of spar
with this thing in a virtual world and
that thing also connects to the system
so it understands where you are and
understands what you're doing arts robot
special yes that could go poorly go very
poorly yeah I could go very poor but it
could also be awesome but you could
imagine perhaps again the augmented
reality systems that we have today are
finding most of their value in training
and it's for people like jet engine
mechanics but you could imagine
scenarios like that where you're
training something like martial arts or
it's looking through and it's not making
you a fully simulated thing but even if
you're working through a drill with
someone if it's basically drawing the
outline of your arm goes here your leg
goes over here I am again
training is one of the value areas that
is working out
if visualization is very important in
martial arts I mean shadowboxing is
already a huge part of strikers learning
like learning how to visualize and
that's what they're doing that's where
they're supposed to do and when you see
a good fighter shadow boxing they're
sort of recreating these movements if
you had a virtual reality headset and
you had an actual opponent in front of
you I think it would be way more
lifelike and actually way more
beneficial in fact there are a bunch of
football teams that are using VR for
some of their training which largely is
kind of visualizing the way plays are
going to go it's not like they have
virtual versions of everything but that
sense of being able to get it to see
what it would look like when it's going
right to kind of lock it into your mind
it has some value it seems to me that
something like the void which is really
fun to do you could see in the future as
technology improves having quake like
competitions in some sort of enormous
warehouse environment with other players
that's been one of the real visions from
from early days and in fact last year we
we cobbled together a demo at oculus
connect our big eye kind of convention
which is next in the new ones next month
here but we had a large area set up and
you had this game called dead and buried
which is kind of a cowboy zombie
shooting thing but we had a bunch of
people that could play in one common
enormous shared area and it was
amazingly cool and everybody's like well
when do we get to play with this and
this was all held together with duct
tape sort of experience that's a lot of
hard work to turn it real but this
warehouse scale stuff there are a number
of companies that are trying to do this
with various bits of technology yeah
just pulled something yeah that idea of
that was I you know where you could set
up people are crouching behind real
things in their virtual headset this is
all kind of zombie western themed stuff
and they can put their hand on real
things there they can move around draw a
bead on people and then you've got
another person there what with a tablet
which is a window into the virtual world
so they could look at that and see the
whole the way it's all drawn in style
the way the people are rendered inside
it so there is yeah this is again the
amazing stuff you can do outside of your
home where you get the VR stuff that you
wind up doing inside your home and then
you figure out what thing
can you do if you're willing to set up a
dedicated play space and yeah this is
people not moving around too much it's
mostly kind of a cover based thing but
there are companies that have people
kind of charging around in pads I am you
know with a virtual world that they can
skin in all sorts of different ways and
that's it's all exciting and as so
here's we're getting an image of what it
looks like to the people that are
playing it so and as things get more and
more accurate in terms of what you're
seeing and more realistic you could
conceivably be jumping up and down on
boxes and running up ladders and things
along those lines and actually doing it
in the virtual world as well as in the
real world yeah so right now like if
you've done the void you can tell
there's like a little gap between
reality and you wouldn't want to do like
a diving grab at a ladder rung but you
know it's you can see that there are
things we need to fix to get there but
that's all possible there's no can't be
done sort of thing there and eventually
you won't even need to be holding a
controller it'll be able to track your
whole body just from cameras and work
all the kind of computer vision magic
out from that and you will then be able
to set up these wonderful skinned
virtual environments yeah that's why I
was thinking like eSports in terms of
like an actual sport sport like eSports
in terms of like doing something on a
soccer field with a bunch of people with
virtual reality and they're playing some
sort of horrific nightmare dystopian
environment zombie game like whatever
you know fill in the blank with your
imagination yeah that's totally gonna be
here Wow that's how far away away from
that so a lot of it depends on kind of
company plans where we don't have people
pester us about the the technical hooks
for things like this and the people that
are doing it themselves like the void
they put their own tracking technology
on top of it because ours isn't set up
publicly in a way that they can do that
so it's a lot of work for people to do
it we will eventually commercialize it
so that you can set things up more
easily out of the box
I am but a lot of these then become
entrepreneurial business plans I'm like
okay who's gonna go raise the the tens
of millions of dollars to set up and do
it right but it's on the cusp of being
it's not a technical problem now it's
not a technical impossibility No
new research really needs to be done but
there's still lots of challenges to work
out so it's more about figuring out if
you can get the business plan to close
you can make the technology work how do
you have time to do other things like
how did you get involved in grappling
how do you have time to turbocharge
Ferraris like where do you come up with
the extra time to do all those other
things so you know I like to tell people
that I one of my pitches is like you
should always get enough sleep like I I
do not work well like I said I can't
work more than 13 hours if I if I don't
get eight hours of sleep I also start
falling down but there's a lot hours
left in the week after you're eight
hours of sleep there I like on the
martial arts side it's it is kind of
interesting where I I wrestled in junior
high and I did sort of Midwest YMCA judo
back then I wasn't any kind of a phenom
I was you know sort of a second-place
finisher for most of it but it was still
weird enough that the cunt cunt of the
school geek was pretty good at that type
of stuff I am I messed up my knees a
little bit doing that and in retrospect
I wish I had pushed on a little bit more
with that where in recent years I sort
of tried to challenge the the wrestler
ethos that I embrace the grind to people
where it's just like discipline is a
something I was always obsessed but I
could have done with a little more
discipline I am when I was younger and I
probably would have been better off if I
had I kind of stuck through some of the
the wrestling side of things I am but I
got back into it in my 30s where it was
kind of something I'm just again one of
the between projects well what
interesting thing do I want to take a
look at and I looked up some of the
local judo places and it was interesting
where the place that I wound up is
called Becerra judo and I had come again
from Midwest YMCA judo which is just
kind of you know you go and you learn
your moves and it's I it's not that
serious but this was a I you know he was
a Cuban Olympian and it still judo's
mostly kids you get mostly I kind of
teenage kids coming in but I go in there
and he's just yelling at the kids and
berating him it's like get up grab the
guy and all this stuff
much more serious training environment
but I got in there it's like hey I did
wrestling and judo back when I was a
teenager 20 years ago at that point but
I got on the mat rolled and I had enough
kind of wrestler instinct memories that
I
I'd go down I'd base out and then the
guy would roll me over an armbar me like
three times in a row cuz you know early
teens I YMCA they didn't teach you the
arm bars or anything I'm but that was
enough it's like hey I was having a good
time with that and so I did what I
always do on something I studied you
know I went and said well okay I let's
learn these arm bars and things and I
got them
you know the instructional and the tapes
and started working my way back through
that and got pretty good at that and
then my wife for Christmas one year got
me a year of private lessons with Carlos
Machado Wow yeah and that was where I
certainly took me up several levels
where I was in a situation where I had
armadillo aerospace my rocketry company
at the time we had enough space so I had
a bunch of mats set out there and I
would work with Carlos and one of the
other guys there on Saturdays and he
really tuned me up where I had a really
good straight arm bar that was my go-to
move for everything and against most of
the judo people that I it was just most
of them wouldn't know what hit them on
that I would just be able to get that
over and over again and there was a
period there where I had I am you know
I'd go mix it up at the club on one day
and then I had judo with one of my
coaches another day and then Carlos on
Saturday there was a period there where
I was pretty dangerous although I was I
was always one of the I never did
workout proper flow kind of just the way
to just kind of roll effortlessly I was
always a very tense aggressive I kind of
grappler and an interesting thing about
that where you know you know from
rolling with any of the the really good
guys I like rolling with Carlos it's
always happy fun he's smiling and you
always think you should be able to do
something but just actually can't but in
contrast with that one time when I went
to Japan I stopped in at the Kodokan you
know the home of Judo kind of the
ancestral land of Judo and you know it's
funny we're talking with a friend about
that I that also did some judo where
you'd think that that should be like
going to the Jedi Temple it should be
this majestic thing but it looks like an
old middle school when you go there
until you actually get out onto the mats
there but I remember I I did some
rolling with an old judo guy you know
gray-haired guy practicing his English
with me and it was shocking how
different it was versus rolling with
Carlos we're still he was way way better
than me but it was a sense where when I
was rolling with him I just felt I had
no options like for whatever reason I
was just always bound up and I couldn't
do anything until eventually gets my arm
and I tap as opposed to the fluidness
with Carlos where I'm like running
around thinking off I just do this maybe
I'll be able to get you know get around
yes
playing yeah yeah judges who's very
famous for playing my instructors his
brother yeah yeah you said you messed
your knees up of course back then I had
tweaked my knees in some way where it
wasn't bad enough that I had maybe at
the time I should have had surgery but I
did jujitsu training no this was
actually back in write one in wrestling
and one in judo when I was a teenager
and so that's why I've still got these
little stick legs cuz I could never lift
what you know heavy weights I've because
my knees gave me problems so I wound up
with strong upper body and really
nothing on though on the legs did you
get your knees and Miraj I never did you
know again this was back and I like you
not embrace MRIs well so again this was
the 80s yeah they did but it's like you
know I was not you know it was a teenage
me back then and it was like okay my
knees are hurt a little bit no so by the
time I was in my 30s they generally felt
okay so that was when I decided I'm
gonna go back into Judo and and it's
been alright for quite a while and it's
you know it's interesting there were a
lot of people are surprised that I care
about this like I tweeted about going to
the UFC in Dallas and there are a number
of people that are like you know this is
shocking and disappointing that you know
that you like guy you know seeing people
harm each other
I had there's one interesting thing at
the club where there was a new kid that
came in and I could tell he was probably
here because his dad thought he should
toughen up a little bit I've you know a
very not forceful person I am and when
he found out who I was he said what is
someone like you doing here and it just
didn't compute for him that I somebody
that was a technical I kind of brainy
sort of person would appreciate my kind
of rolling at a judo club and and I
probably agree with his his father that
there's a there
is a value to getting getting people
into a sense where they felt the
physicality of it they've had to push as
hard as they can and maybe not get
through you and learn that find the
extents of what you can and can't do and
what the limits of your body are and I
think that's good for almost everybody
to get that at some level I mean even if
you don't care about the competition and
the winning but kind of knowing what's
possible and the different limits there
I think is valuable I agree
wholeheartedly and I love the fact that
you got into it because I would like to
encourage so many more people to
experience that there are there's many
things going on simultaneously there's a
technical aspects of the various moves
they have to understand the points of
leverage and how to get to a superior
position there's also the physical
exertion aspect where you're you're
managing your body's resources and you
have a finite amount of energy and you
can't burn it all out quickly so there's
this sort of management game that you're
playing and then on top of it it's like
you you have to be able to be
uncomfortable it's you have to be able
to put yourself in a good state of mind
while you're uncomfortable and so many
of those lessons learn from that or
applicable to everyday life and they
they give you a higher threshold for
discomfort a higher threshold for
pushing through obstacles and
understanding boundaries and how to
overcome them and how to increase your
physical engine how to strengthen your
your meat vehicles yeah that whole
lesson about you know sometimes you're
the hammer and sometimes you're the nail
and a lot of people do go through much
of their life I have you know without
ever really internalizing that it's
always you know a participation trophy
or whatever but it's like sometimes you
get your ass kicked
ad that can bring it you can come back
stronger after yes
it's good for you it's actually good for
you and it's an amazing camaraderie it's
particularly grappling I found that
grappling the camaraderie is much nicer
than striking I came from a striking
background because the thing about
striking all there is a camaraderie a
deep camaraderie with people that you
would go and compete with you're hurting
each other yeah whereas in grappling
you're not really hurting each other the
same way and you can kind of do it full
blast and
you appreciate each other because iron
truly does sharpen iron and yeah I mean
there are so many times I remember just
driving back from the AIA from judo
where I just have a big smile on my face
just thinking that was really great yeah
now it's like the judo club was in AI
you know a little bit of a sketchier
area of town so my wife was always like
you can never drive your Ferraris to
judo practice so how did you get
involved with turbo charging Ferraris
like what because that's a no-no in the
Ferrari yeah right definitely the
Porsche world they sort of always
encouraged the modifications of the cars
even from the early days people have hot
rodded Porsches but when you fuck around
with a Ferrari people get really upset
at you so my path through the cars is
interesting where I as a younger kid I
was not a car guy you know I had a
stepbrother with the Lamborghini posters
and all of that and I just did not care
I was all about computers I I knew what
I wanted I would much rather have you
know a new Apple then I look at a
Porsche or something like that and my
first car was this very boring G
Volkswagen Jetta it's like hey it drives
me around I was just fine somebody
recognized in to it and looking around
for the next car my I'm like uncle in
law or something had I I worked on cars
and he had an old British MGB him in his
garage you're familiar with a British
sports cars and you know in many ways
they're just terrible terrible cars but
I fell in love with it it was just
beautiful and I and I started I had to
learn all about cars at that point
because you know the clutch master
cylinder broke the very first day that I
had it and just everything is breaking
all the time and it's a pathetic weak
little engine but you're like oh I can
make it a little bit faster by doing
some of these different things and I
went through the like many other things
that I've had in my life I go through
sort of this larval learning stage where
I start reading the hotrod magazines and
graduate to circle track or something
and again this is Midwest
you know Missouri where I grew up I so I
learned all the basic ins and outs of
the cars there I am and then I go on I
started software and start getting
successful and I do the sort of natural
upgrade from an MGB after it I year box
eats itself I buy a Miata which is sort
of the the modder and slick version of a
British sports car
and that was going along I you know okay
for me I enjoyed it but almost on a whim
one time I went into the Ferrari
dealership in Dallas and Here I am it I
was like Wolfenstein days so I guess I
was twenty year twenty years old or
something and I'm in a t-shirt ripped
jeans and I walk into the Ferrari
dealership and say can I sell me a
Ferrari I am and they humored me and
they I kind of walked around I you know
we looked at the different things and a
lot of the the Ferraris at that time in
the early 90s I'm I am you know 348 sand
Mondale's I didn't really like all that
much but one of the ones in the back
garage they had a four a 328 which is
kind of that you know the fancier
version of the magnum p.i car from the
earlier days and I thought it was just
the most beautiful car I am you know
this is I really wanted to get it and
when I wound up buying it it was
interesting because the salesman gave me
a little bit of a talk where he said you
know if someone in the Corvette pulls up
next to you and I kind of revs their
engine just kind of hang your hand out
the window like you got a thousand
horsepower under the hood and that
didn't sit well with me that was like
this idea of like he kind of knew that
those cars weren't actually as fast as
they looked or you know or their
reputation would have and that there's
this play that you would do to just kind
of not get into a situation where it
doesn't hold up to its looks and I was
like you know I don't like that and so I
wound up kind of calling around to all
the different shops in Dallas where it's
like okay I've got a Ferrari 328 I want
to make it a little faster and I had
done all this stuff on my MGB back in
the day so I know the things they that
you wind up doing with intake and
exhaust and cam timings and the options
there but they were all basically
horrified like you just don't do this to
a Ferrari and like the only suggestion
that came out was oh we can put an
Italian to be exhaust on it and that'll
you know don't make it sound better and
maybe it's good for a couple horsepower
or something and those are things that
people largely do for the aesthetics I
know whether it's oral or visual with it
and that's not a big move and right
about that time John Romero at the
office had I picked up there's a copy of
turbo magazine I'm back in the day and
there was an article about an old
applica I am kind of racecar and done by
a local company in Dallas called Norwood
Autosport or Norwood auto craft and I
thought well he's right here I'll call
him up and so I call him up I get Bob
Norwood on the phone and I start going
through my pitch I've got a 328 I'd like
it to be a little faster what do you
think we can and before I could even
finish she said we'll put a turbo on it
like yeah now we're talking and that was
the beginning of I am kind of all the
science project experiments what is a
328 have standard horsepower I think in
the best probably the European trim mate
you know is probably around 300
horsepower and would you get it up to
with the turbocharger so we went through
a number of steps of this and this is
all swapping out all the computer
electronics I'm different turbos and
eventually I melted the engine in it
when it was at like 500 or so and I went
through a long history of melting many
Pistons in the different devices in
different cars but that wound up being
this decade-long set of interesting
experiments there that was my gateway
drug into working on this and we're like
okay we've made all this power in this
system I we know it's kind of at the
limits of a lot of things in the chassis
after we melted the engine there we
tuned it back down a little bit that's
the way so many engineering things wind
up going you go it until it breaks then
you dial it back a little bit and you
stay there it must have been radically
fast for a 328 it's very light right yes
it's a kerb weight uh well it's not
superlight I think it was like 3,200
pounds something but yeah it you could
really feel it rear back when you went
into it and I'm at high speed is a
little bit dirty if you start getting up
in 150 40 miles an hour for that so we
thought well what's the next level where
do we go from here so I he had done a
twin turbo job on a Testarossa before
which is a much wider car I have you
know stock they would go 180 190 miles
an hour with a normal Ferrari trim and
and it was a bigger five liter flat 12
so there's a lot more possibility for
doing things there so I got I got a
Testarossa and we said alright we're
going to do the twin turbo job with
intercoolers with the new I you know the
new engine management systems and we
went through this long string of up
through this which generally was like
okay we melted the pistons we you know
broke the input shaft all these times
but at its top form in peak I still have
the dyno sheet for was like a thousand
and nine horsepower at the rear wheels
none of this crank horsepower talked
this was I you know over a thousand
horsepower at the rear wheels and it was
amazing that sounds ridiculous what does
standard horsepower with those it was
like 380 or something oh my god so it
was a huge huge difference and you had
all these things like you know he
couldn't launch like a dragster Ferrari
gear shifts or you know really gears in
a blender sort of thing and you've got a
dogleg first so it would not do a really
fast
0 to 60 but if you were on the highway I
am and you could just downshift to 4th
you could go from 50 to 150 faster than
anybody's business it was with that much
horsepower I you know I would run down
super bikes it would it would just be
faster than anybody it was shockingly
fast how did it handsome really pretty
well so we we had bigger tires some
stiffer suspension on it it was not
designed to be a super track car I had
taken all of my Ferraris to the tracks
but I was no no pretensions about being
any kind of an SEC a champion or
anything but I could wing him I could
move him around the tracks reasonably
well but the main thing about this was
this just ungodly amount of power it was
this see Jesus effect when somebody
takes a ride in it you're like okay
we're going you ready for this and you
have enough space and for all of those
years that had software our building was
positioned I off of this we had this
long highway access road that led down
to it and I'm mostly more often than not
I was working kind of night owl' hours
and this car was so loud I am kind of
obnoxious in retrospect but I am I had
this personal drag strip basically every
day when I would go there and everybody
in the building could tell it's like Oh
John's coming which was sort of the
signal better get to work and look busy
by the time he gets up here I but it was
especially in the early days before we
got some traction control dialed in it
could get really squirrely just because
when the boost would come up fast enough
on there it would tend to throw the car
a little bit sideways and I'm you know
I'm happy that I can look back and say
you know I never spun a car on the
I had one of the big cars on the streets
I did spend my little mg bi
when I was learning how to drive as a
teenager but I never did that with the
big Ferraris on public roads although
there was one time at the the
Motorsports ranch when I pitched my f50
like through the infield just spinning
it around over and over and were like
well there's the world's most expensive
lawnmower now what did you do with those
cars so I'm the first one I gave the 328
I gave away for the red annihilation
tournament so that was I that fresh one
that was do you think so no he wound up
I that was there were some pictures of
that going around recently where it was
a little bit weird sketchy because I it
was a turbocharged theirs and it really
wasn't technically legal in Dallas most
of the time I know we would make it
legal sometimes but much of the time it
probably wouldn't have passed an
emissions test and it really wouldn't
have passed a California emissions test
so he wound up using it as he had it
sort of in the lobby of his company for
a while as kind of a conversation piece
and he did I think eventually wound up
selling it I think I got a message from
someone last year that still had it so
it's still functional at this point
which is saying something because it had
an early almost one-off pultec engine
control system that probably no one can
do anything to right now you probably
have to completely replace it if
something went wrong with it
the Testarossa we eventually detuned it
a little bit down to I six or seven
hundred horsepower or something and
somebody bought it from me and I felt he
might have been buying more cars than he
should have at that point well basically
it's gonna break again it's going to
have problems I you know he wanted it I
think that he got some great
satisfaction out of it but I know it
broke again on him later and I and I
think he had to get rid of it you know
after that then I had I had a Ferrari
f40 which is beautiful beautiful car and
that was the only car that I didn't
really modify I am all we did was turn
the wastegate and closed you know lock
that off so it was making all basically
race trim f40 there and the f40 is an
interesting car in that it has I in
those early days the turbos weren't
nearly what they are right now it was a
small engine 2.8 litre because it was
spec for racing it really was sort of a
race car
and if you didn't wring its neck it was
a pretty slow car if you just like idled
it off it felt like a Honda Civic it was
terrible at the low end you had really
rev it up and slip the clutch out get it
up on boost but it was it was a great
car because it was like this amazing
race car that you're driving around on
the road and that was still where didn't
even have eternal door handles they had
a little pull cord I inside there which
led to the point where there was one
time I was getting at valet parked and
you could tell the valet that had to go
get the car for me it's like this is
okay highlight of the week he gets to go
drive a Ferrari f40 and he pulls it up
and he can't figure out how to open the
door so all of his friend you know
everyone else working with him are just
kind of looking at him and I had to come
over and tell him how to to get it out
so that went from the highlight to like
the worst day this is time there do you
still do that do you still have cars
like that so no right now I am all about
the Tesla where I have I I have a P 100
D and I think it's the best car I've
ever owned by far so I've gone through
all of these hyper exotics and I love my
Tesla I have the same and it's as fast
as anything it's the fastest car I've
ever driven in my life so compared to my
you know my supercars there that the
Tesla is much quicker off the start
which most of the time that you're
driving is you know my point about then
I talked about how antisocial the old
cars were where I did you could not just
go use this you would have to plan ahead
where okay you make sure that you've got
enough room if you have a traction issue
going here you're gonna cover a huge
amount of distance it was so loud you
really wouldn't want to do it in most
places but the Tesla is so magical where
I had one of the first roadsters and one
of the when I was flooding some other
people take it out for drives they said
you're driving a railgun
which essentially you are it's this
electromagnetic pull on the car and you
just push the throttle down and it just
goes and it's this amazing feeling and
it's not anti-social every stop sign you
stop back you've got traction control
it's not burning rubber you could just
floor it every time you stop and it's
amazing it just brings a smile to your
face it is this happiness machine
well the stunning acceleration is so
confusing to people I've like my wife
hates it my I've had people in my car
and I go you ready for this and I
stomp the gas and then just go Jesus
yeah cuz it doesn't seem real it doesn't
seem like a car that looks like you know
a nice four-door sedan should be able to
do that yeah so that launch is
definitely really something but I am
compared to like if you're if you're
already moving the the old tester OSA
with a thousand horsepower was a very
different beast where that Jesus sense
that you get at the very beginning
it's that magnified extended for quite a
while as you're running up through 150
miles an hour or so and I am
but yeah I'm signed up for the the next
the 2020 the next roadster when it's not
supposed to come out so you know I
wouldn't put too much I you know they'll
probably slip you know the Tesla is like
I you know like game companies and so
much of the other stuff I think they
were saying it might be I don't want a
mistake we should probably look it up
here but I'm on the list it's gonna get
here as soon as it can and I want the
rocketboost Edition also with the extra
compressed gas tanks yeah what is that
gonna do what does that extra rocker
boost thinking so the idea is that I
cars with this much power are completely
traction limited especially at launch
where you have no aerodynamic forces so
you could have infinite horsepower and
you're not going to get if you off the
line 230 miles an hour any faster than
what the P 100 will do given these same
amount of tires so I'm there's a few
things that you could do with that you
can be like a rocket you can throw
something out the back so you need no
traction and all rockets don't use they
don't require traction they don't
require air and they can work in space
so most Rockets of course have AI all
sorts of propellants you really don't
generally want to be around that are
either cryogenic or toxic or generally
problematic i but the idea here is that
for spacex they've developed a lot of
these really cutting-edge
state-of-the-art compressed gas tanks
which are the same types of things you
use for a compressed gas vehicle tanks
except much higher much more mass
efficient so the idea is you just fill
them with air pump them up and it's like
an enormous balloon you know you let go
of the balloon it flies around the room
I well when you've got 10,000 psi of air
in you put a rocket nozzle on it and
essentially you just open the valve and
it can push you forward with an almost
arbitrary amount of thrust the amount of
thrust is only determined by how big the
throat of the
rocket nozzle is which means that
sometimes you see these industrial
accidents where if like the end of a
compressed gas tank falls off I so it's
got a hole like this big and all of the
gas is coming out of there it all blows
out in a very short amount of time but
that can launch those you know those
bottles like really high into the air
through walls it's limited only by how
big of an outlet you want to get it I
don't know what their specking this as
for how much they can do but there's an
interesting thing about that where you
can have it just throw the thrust
I completely horizontally but I suspect
it would be slightly better if they
angle it up a little bit so you get a
little bit of downforce so you can both
steer better but in the early things
especially on the roadster you've got
more torque available from the electric
motor than you have traction so you
would wind up with net best acceleration
by a little bit of downforce so the
engine can actually throw all of its
power at it and from the electric motor
and then all the rest of it is
horizontal thrust now ideally of course
you would gimbal it and you could start
moving it around and vary your downforce
and thrust and I you know you could take
this all the way where you put them on
all four corners and you could bunnyhop
your car that's not spec for the current
vehicle but you could take that exact
same system put more of them on there
and you could control that which is like
all the work that I was doing in
rocketry started out with these i
computer-controlled rocket vehicles that
would use the Rockets and steer them
under control and they could sit up
there in the hover kind of right in
front of you move around translate and
land and you could totally do that on a
car you wouldn't be able to do it for
very long but the idea of being able to
make sort of a Batmobile leap or
something to be able to it's like get
away get over something that is
plausible and would be interesting to do
Wow look how far do you think you travel
so it totally depends on how much
propellant in this case cold gas doesn't
give you very much so no it's not would
not be flying car but that's why I'm
saying you could make a hopping car you
could make something that takes a leap
has enough propellant to be able to do a
steady descent so it's an impulse up and
then it decelerates so you're not
wrecking and let's the suspension take
the rest of it at the end and somebody
should do that that's something that the
world should be able to see that
happening so similar to what they're
doing currently with jetpacks where they
have a very short window of time where
they can apply the thrusters
interesting to compare the the history
of that where in the early days from
back in the 60s there were people that
made these rocket packs that used
concentrated hydrogen peroxide which is
one of the easiest rocket propellants to
work with and it's what I you know my
company used for a number of years I am
the great thing about that is it's one
liquid mono propellant as opposed to by
propellant where you need like liquid
oxygen and kerosene so it's just one
liquid and essentially you just spray it
through this special mesh of catalysts
and it decomposes to really hot steam
and lots of it so it's the easiest
rocket in the world to make maintaining
the catalysts is a problem but
fundamentally you need a tank
pressurized up in a valve that opens to
kind of go through that I am so they
would make these things where they would
have a couple nozzles and they could
slowly open the throttle and let them up
and you'd see the people kind of
hovering around and what's important
about this is that is completely
unstable there is no sense of kind of a
stability that you get even on a
helicopter which is very unstable you
still have a big spinning mass and it's
got some directional stability if you're
flying on rocket thrust alone you can
flip end over in trivially so the people
that did these I they were like stuntmen
people that were used to doing this and
still almost everybody wound up breaking
legs having problems like this I because
they could only last for about 30
seconds usually about 20 seconds you
have this backpack full of I maybe
you're carrying 5060 pounds of
propellant and all that gets you is 20
seconds of flight time so they would
plan out all of these things it's like
alright we're gonna fly into the Olympic
Stadium or whatever as this very short
it's an arc from here coming down to
here because you just do not have much
time to loiter around and try to fix
things what makes the modern jetpacks
that people are working on so much
better than that is the way it jet works
is instead of like a rocket where
everything that it's throwing out the
nozzle is stored in a tank jets work by
using the air as for oxygen which is the
bulk of what you wind up consuming and
then only carrying kerosene or some kind
of fuel jet fuel to burn with that so
that lets them get several minutes of
flight from things like this even from
potentially smaller tanks I am now
they're still I looks like they're still
largely doing it with highly skilled
operator
that are working that that are on the
edge of wiping out in any given moment
and you know and wisely they often
flying over water and so on but there's
no reason why that can't be
computer-controlled and you see the
amazing things that people are doing
with drones now this is something that I
think about where it was pretty exciting
the early days of the rocket stuff that
I was doing where you had a rocket that
could hover and slowly move over I there
was one time we were flying at an
Oklahoma airfield and we had this you
know kind of good-old-boy reporter
coming out there and we flew this rocket
through this trajectory was for the the
lunar lander challenge it was like well
there's something you don't see every
day
and it was this very shocking thing
about this giant 2,000 pound rocket just
kind of picking up and moving over and
landing but the same algorithms like I
was proud of myself doing those I had
learned all the necessary control
dynamics and embedded systems
programming and stuff to do that code
I'm and it was doing what we needed it
to do but you look at what people do
with drones today and it's just
magnificent these aerial ballets have
synchronized hundreds of drones doing
all these gymnastics and you could do
that with the rocket engines or the jet
engines or something like that and they
could be doing movie style Iron Man's
stuff as soon as you're willing to let
the computer trust I you know that it's
going to do the right thing but that's
the key difference where we were able to
make amazing progress for what we were
doing because we were willing to build
and destroy a couple vehicles a year and
I was very proud of that for a long time
at least eight or nine years we built
and destroyed two rocket vehicles each
year we learned something built another
one and you know threw it away and these
were you know fairly expensive they
would cost us I'm you know later ones in
the you know hundred something thousand
dollars and you have to know that you're
building it it's gonna turn into a
smoking pile of wreckage I at some point
you know the vehicle will be expended in
the learning process but what's made the
drone so much better is all of these
people that do these University teams
doing controlled dynamics they have a
closet full of drone wreckage because
the drones are so amazingly cheap that
you just have these converted these
commoditized parts you put them together
they try something that's up we blew
them you know we crashed another drone
toss it in the closet
grab another one out and that's a real
lesson about pace of being you know the
acceleration that you can get by
reducing the high at the time to
experiment are you done with the Rocket
world so I used to think about it a lot
more even after I was kind of out of it
where I you know getting out of rockets
my wife is wiser than I am in many ways
where she had put a kind of a limit we
had this is John's crazy rocket money
huh and I have you know you are not
going to bankrupt the family I by
pursuing rocket dreams and I was doing
it part-time and eventually we got to
the point where we had we had one year
where we had an operating profit for a
little aerospace company we were working
for I you know we were doing some NASA
and Air Force and rocket racing league
that was great these manned rocket
planes we built that they got to fly
around and you know have some racing
with some stuff that I was very proud of
but I am we reached a point where
there's this trap that a lot of
companies like that can get into and I
saw a number of them in it where you go
into this thinking that we're going to
change the world we're gonna do this
massive thing we want to colonize space
all of this but you get stuck in this
area where alright there are
opportunities for us we can get
government contracts to do various work
you know there's work we can do for NASA
and Department of Defense but and you
tell yourself that well we'll do this
and we'll be using their money to fund
the real dream of thought the rocket
ships that we want to build but it I've
never seen it work out like that you
know you wind up I kind of stuck in this
drip-feed of you can get a few new
contracts and you can keep the lights on
and the government does this really
largely intentionally where they say
it's good for the United States to have
some level of grassroots aerospace
companies these small technology
companies it actually covers a whole
bunch of material science and lots of
different things it's good to have these
small companies exist so the government
doles out this drip-feed of contracts
where you can keep your researchers and
engineers kind of working putting some
things together I and it was a fork in
the road there we could have gone down
that path but decided that no we were
gonna try like one more year I'll put
the money into it we're gonna go for it
we need to it's like suborbital or bust
I am you know getting the 100 kilometer
reusable vehicles and we didn't quite
make it you know we got to like 92
kilometers and I'm you know out in space
some lovely pictures of like the the
flare of the Sun and spinning around in
the black sky and loot coming out for
re-entry and things that I was proud of
but you know we just didn't quite make
it and I was at that point where I had
to say it's like all right this is the
you know the end of the road I did wind
up selling most of the assets to some of
the team members that raised some other
funding to continue on I am but the one
of my biggest lessons from that is I
don't think I can do a proper job
splitting my focus part time between
different things because I was still
full-on on its software and doing the
gaming I was like 40 hours I did in 20
hours at Armadillo and I and I just
wasn't able to give it the focus that it
needed I don't know how Ilan can you
know have five companies that he's
involved in to some degree I I think
that me personally I need to have some
level of focus so I was saying if I go
back into it I want to do it full-time
I have my my crazy ideas for things that
I'd like to try in rocketry but largely
I think SpaceX is doing an amazing job
but I it is again things sneak up on
people they don't notice the world
changing around them but this was the
science-fiction future that we wanted in
the 50s and 60s you know we have a
billionaire that's gone out and built
the world's best rocket ship that wants
to go to Mars and is building the rocket
ship to do that you know this is you
know this is the movie scenario it's
almost you know the only thing is in
movies it wouldn't have taken the decade
plus time that it takes if it somehow
would have been compressed into three or
four years so it takes longer in reality
but even the things you want to see in
the movies are actually happening here
so I think SpaceX is doing a great job
and I am you know I was dead Elon
invited me by and he actually had me
sitting in one of their engineering
meetings and I'm just throwing out
random ideas to the the people there and
I I know I could kind of you know they'd
be they'd be happy to have me working
with him in some way but I'd be just
another you know principal engineer on
some way I'm much more interested in
being the crazy plan see in some
and if I thought there really needed to
be a crazy plan see I have my ideas for
scary snicks monopropellant rockets that
might be super cheap in some ways might
blow up horribly i but it turns out that
there are now a number of companies like
i it's shocking now that there's another
company like rocket lab that's been
successfully launching things into orbit
and we almost haven't noticed and
remarked around it about it where this
is something that again
prior to spacex space launch was the
domain of a half-dozen national
governments and now we have a few small
companies spacex isn't small anymore but
we have you know a few companies that
have just gone and done that and that's
pretty great so i am tempted to go back
in I have ideas that I'd like to try but
I think it's in good enough hands right
now but it's always a possibility in the
future
what does Jeff Bezos company trying to
do they're emulating SpaceX in some sort
of a way right so yeah Blue Origin was
like all three of these had have origins
back in similar periods of time like at
the very start of Armadillo when we had
her to star very crudest things Elon and
one of his first guys came down visited
us in Dallas and we talked about rockets
and everything I then Bezos came in
somewhat later initially very very
secretive I am and also very
conservative where you know in their
logo they've got a tour a turtle went
basically and it was there's more or
less saying we're gonna take our time
and do this and I did always think that
was the wrong direction where I am
that's a real hazard where you have a
billionaire backer that says take your
time I am you know unlike SpaceX where
SpaceX was burning through all of you
ons money I am you know you on had a
large fraction of his fortune invested
in this and he was down to the last
point where they blew up three rockets
it's like this one's got to make it or
they're just not going to be able to get
by and that's a very very different work
environment than I you know hey if we've
got a blank check you know we can take
our time we can do all of this I and I
know every time something goes wrong for
SpaceX every time you know they have an
explosion or a landing failure so many
people are ready to jump on them but
that's what's allowed them to make these
really truly remarkable advances so the
turtle approach is just not conducive to
well they've cranked it up read more
recently they've gotten serious about
building full-scale stuff so they sort
of built the suborbital vehicle that
that I was on track to build then it
goes up to 100 kilometers talk about
space tourism carry people up I do the
little ride like have you ever taken one
of the zero-g airplane rides no you
should it's interesting yeah I this one
this would be the I you go do that you
get these little kind of parabolas of 20
seconds or so of weightlessness where
you can float around or you can get
simulated Martian or lunar gravity the
idea of the suborbital space tourism
would be that you go up there to 100
kilometers and plummet down and you've
got about five minutes of zero gravity
floating around with space outside and
that's the idea that that would be you
know this remarkable experience and we
had a bunch of companies that were sort
of targeting this as the direction that
I there's not much market for small
satellite you know these tiny micro set
payloads how do you close the business
the pitch was always that well if we
have this reliable people want to do
this and would call them like
self-loading carbon payloads people will
want to go in I the world's tallest
roller coaster and you'd say originally
the thinking was that would be $100,000
which is like of course everybody's like
whoa that's like way too much but
there's a lot of wealthy people in the
world it seems reasonable but one of the
interesting life lessons I got from this
when virgin finally came into this and
they decided well we're going to enter
this I'm all of these little scrappy
companies I that didn't necessarily have
much business know-how or things like
hundred thousand dollars sounds about
right for the price for a several
tourism it's a nice round number
but virgin came in Richard Branson all's
like now the price is $200,000 and
everybody still signed up with him that
was a notable thing we're reading your
market correctly for that we're that was
the difference between $100,000 maybe
eking by and covering your bases and
everything and $200,000 it's like oh
you've actually got some profit margin
there but now a decade has passed since
that's gone on and there's no way
they're going to earn back their all the
investment that they've piled into that
you know
take too long you know that's in Tanjung
off here yeah but that's another one of
the life lessons where I used to be
known about the catch line you know
it'll be done when it's done you know
when when will doom ship when it's done
when will quake ship when it's done and
it felt good saying that in terms of
that was sort of a being rebellious
about we don't have any publisher that's
gonna force us to be out in time for
their quarterly earnings we're going to
make sure we we ship the game when it's
actually done but the aspects of seeing
I with a little bit more perspective now
it's like if you're talking slipping a
cord or slipping six months yeah great
that's definitely fine but when you're
talking about slipping years you know
when years go by the world changes
around you in a way that being a kind of
totalitarian about it'll only ship when
it's done I largely recant from that now
where with a little bit more perspective
time has a physicality that you may not
appreciate and I have the two big reads
on that I am seeing some of like Virgin
Galactic they're never gonna make that
money back they're looking into
satellite launch for things now but even
the the last big game that I worked on
it in which was rage I'm we spent six
years on that game and we went into that
I am it was using flashy new technology
which there's some other life lessons
about that I but we had like we had an
e3 where we were game of show at e3 but
you know we kept on it didn't quite ship
and by the time it got out the world had
changed around us you know the
technology decisions that were made for
some earlier systems weren't necessarily
the right thing for the the very latest
ones we now had Call of Duty and
Battlefield coming out as these jogger
knots that we were competing with and I
look back as one of those real decisions
I think we should have done whatever it
would have taken to ship that two years
earlier be less ambitious with some of
the technologies and get it out earlier
and I can even make reasonable cases for
going back to the earliest games like
quake where quake was I the first really
traumatic game to ship internally where
we're still only talking like two-year
developments but at the time it felt
really long and we had all sorts of
internal strife for things because we
were trying to do so many things it was
you know six degree of freedom rendering
modding I am internet based game servers
I you know 3/6 off models and it was a
lot of stuff and I later looked back and
said you know we could have done half of
those things in a super Doom and shifted
earlier and then done the other half
even better on a game coming in later
and I still roll that over in my mind
sometimes where I love quake and I love
do and I think all of those were doom I
think was the optimal game to ship at
the optimal time quake was challenging
and painful enough that maybe we could
have done some things slightly better
there eye-popping a couple off the stack
there to back to Blue Origin I I think
they spent a lot more time than they
needed to I in that kind of turtle mode
but now they're building big serious
things and I think they probably
abandoned the space tourism stuff they
flew their thing it's like it looks good
enough that some people could get in but
right now it's interesting when you go
from the game of $200,000 I fell
floating carbon payloads to billion
dollar NASA contracts and it drives your
engineering in different ways so I think
they're now saying we don't want SpaceX
to run off and take it all for
themselves and they're scrambling a
little bit to build their bring their
architectures to bear there well that's
gotta be beneficial to everybody right
to have all these billion dollar
companies compete particularly Bezos
with his unlimited bank account
competing and for all of us to watch
these commercial space ventures
take place it's really really
interesting so I do think that space is
one of those things that I'm you can
make all the hard analytic arguments
about okay we've got communication
satellites and all the stuff that like
Elon is doing with I then the low
altitude satellite communication
networks these are big important things
that may be incredibly valuable but all
of us that have done this at that level
do really believe deeply at some level
that we do want humanity to not be tied
to the earth you know there we want to
be a multi planet or at least space
habitat item species where there's this
sense that the world is dis critize now
when you have GPS and it's kind of a
weird thing
you you can look at GPS with the numbers
read out to all of this and say you are
exactly here within a meter eye on the
world you can map the whole world and
lay a texture over it in some ways that
squeezed some of the magic out of the
world you know you at the lost city of
El Dorado is probably not hiding I've
you know in some place that has just had
canopy cover for all of this because we
could turn it into a grid and walk
through all of it if we need to and it
leads some people to a more fatalistic
attitude than they should have about the
limits of growth the limits of resources
that you know we need to dial back our
ambitions because the world is only so
big and there's too many people in it
and I think they're wrong even on the
single earth case that there are so many
resources here that people do not even
appreciate but I think once you step
outside of the earth and once you do
have people on the Moon and Mars and
that are doing things there there's a
lot of reasons about eggs in one basket
sort of things asteroid killer asteroids
and stuff but just having humanity
spread out more like that and knowing
that I want people to be able to look up
at the moon a full moon and say there
are people working up there there's
another city up there and that's some
place you might go later on I am for
some reason you know that you get on the
next transport there and this is the the
good old-fashioned future a sort of the
50s and 60s the the Robert Heinlein
science fiction world of the future you
know a strong jawed engineers building
the the spacefaring world and I realize
I'm conscious of the fact that I have a
foot in both camps here where you know
I'm building VR which is kind of that
the stuck in the matrix sort of thing
the dystopian modern science fiction
future but a large part of me does still
kind of hanker for this this old sense
of like know the possibilities are
unlimited technology will save us we can
get there it's a matter of engineering
we can build what we want
we've never been in a better position
before there's smarter people in the
world today than there ever have been
and that you know it's unlimited it's
not this limited world that we're stuck
in we can go we can colonize Mars we can
colonize the Meuse and we can make space
stations and the fact that we now have
idealistic billionaires building this
that we don't have to go ahead and
necessarily wrangle the votes in Ohio
for the NASA
Station in Houston or whatever I think
it's a fantastic thing
I agree do you have a long-term vision
in terms of what you're trying to do
with virtual reality and off to us so I
do and it's I'm you know it's something
that people some people read this the
wrong way and react incorrectly to it
where I've said that my pitch for VR is
that the promise of VR is it's to make
the world as you want it where people do
not have the it's just it is not
possible on earth to be able to give
everybody all that they would want not
everybody can have Richard Branson's
private island there's just not enough
private and not enough islands in the
world to give them to people but even on
a much more mundane level not everyone
can have a mansion of a house not
everyone can even necessarily have a
home theater room and these are things
that we can simulate to some degree in
virtual reality
now the simulations not as good as the
real thing again if you are rich and you
have your own home theater and mansion
and private island good for you
i we may still be able to offer you the
convenience of being able to
instantaneously get to different places
but you're still probably not the people
that are going to benefit most from it i
but most of the people in the world
aren't in that position most of the
people in the world live in relatively
clamped quarters that are not what they
would choose to be if they had unlimited
resources and the technology curves for
these things are this is $400 now we
have an earlier one that's $200 that's
less capable but these follow the
cellphone price curves in many ways we
have $25 cell phones in India now that
are smartphones that do a lot of these
things the technology curve Moore's law
may be crapping out in terms of absolute
performance but we've still got a lot of
price performance that we can drive out
of these things and we can have virtual
reality devices that can get cheap
enough that lots and lots of people will
be able to have these and we can make
better and better software and it can be
a better world in many ways now people
everybody points towards like there's
this art piece of art that goes around
the internet of this sort of dystopian
kid in the corner drew you know drooling
with glass goggles on with rainbow
pictures on them
and it's a terrible looking place and
people say it's like oh this is the
world you're trying to build people
plugged into virtual reality that ignore
the world around them and of course the
first rejoinder to that is well is his
life really better if he takes them off
and he's in this horrible place there
but more concretely like I just came
from in Dallas it's a hundred degrees
this week there we changed the world
around us in all that we do we live in
air-conditioning and people nowadays
don't generally go oh you're not
experiencing the world around you
because of your air conditioning you
should be out there really experiencing
the world you know that is what human
beings do is we you know we bend the
world to our will and I think that a
virtual reality that lets people do
things that would not be possible in the
world or it comes down to it not
economical and a lot of people react
negatively to any talk about economics
but it is resource allocation I am you
know you have to make decisions about
where things go and I think that
economically we can deliver more value
to a lot of people in this virtual sense
we're at the very earliest stage of it
right now with the experiences that we
have and the things you can do and how
long you want to keep it on but there is
a path to this comfortable thing that
you can wear for hours at a time maybe
you spend your entire workday working in
it maybe your time after coming home is
putting it on and I mean right now you
can you can watch TV with someone else
in virtual reality which is this mundane
thing but you can have AI you know your
sister or somebody that's across the
country and you could have meet in a
virtual space look over and see each
other and you know watch something on TV
like all activities that do not require
an actual tactile physical thing can
eventually be subsumed in this where
there are a lot of things that do
require the tactile stuff you're not
going to be replacing food with virtual
reality anytime soon but a surprising
amount of things that people value are
these largely audio-visual things it's
the decoration the museum that you walk
through
you're not fondling the individual
things they're you're experiencing
things in a way that could with a
good-enough virtual reality experience
be replicated there without the travel
without the lines without the crowds you
could have it private to yourself and
there's so many things like this if
not everything it's two of your senses
simulated fairly well but we can do an
enormous amount with this and I always
like internally I'm almost a broken
record in the company most people are
tired of hearing me harp about this but
it's all about user value you know what
I care about building things as an
engineer the whole point is to bring
value to the world and I think that
virtual reality can bring a lot of value
we're not there yet we're in very early
days of there are certain niches of
people today that can get a great value
out of this I don't pretend that this is
something that you know everyone in the
world can benefit from today but we're
inching our way up towards that and
that's how you know that's how the world
gets better is by building technologies
and distributing to the people so that
they have something better than they
would have had if that didn't exist john
carmack thank you for being you thank
you and thank you for everything you've
done
thanks for being here it's an honour I'm
glad we finally got to do it and I
really appreciate you all right great be
nice thanks thank you bye everybody
[Music]
[Applause]